The State Department was guilty of systematic failures in security that made the deadly Sept. 11 terrorist attacks on the U.S. mission in Libya possible, a high-level investigative panel concluded in an unflinching examination made public late Tuesday.
A high-level panel faults the State Department for systematic security failures, which left the U.S. mission in Libya ill-equipped to deal with the attacks.
A U.S. soldier accused of killing 16 Afghan villagers in a shooting rampage could face the death penalty if found guilty in a court-martial.
A decorated U.S. soldier accused of killing 16 Afghan villagers in two forays from his remote military camp was ordered to face a court martial before a military panel that could impose the death penalty if he is found guilty, the military said on Wednesday.

As burials in Newtown continue, U.S. President Barack Obama says the nation will have a set of recommendations to address widespread gun violence within weeks.
But the North has said Ms. Park would be a mere continuation of the current administration.

President Vladimir Putin backed a ban on Americans adopting Russian children on Thursday in a feud over a U.S. law that aims to punish Russians accused of violating human rights.

NASA has shut down access to an online database and banned new requests from Chinese and some other foreign nationals seeking access to its facilities amid mounting concerns about espionage and export control violations, the U.S. space agency's administrator said on Wednesday.
The security measures include a complete ban on remote computer access by Chinese and some other non-U.S. contractors already working at NASA centers, agency chief Charles Bolden said at a congressional oversight hearing in Washington.
The tightening of security follows the arrest on Saturday of Chinese national Bo Jiang, a former NASA contractor. He was attempting to return to China with "a large amount of information technology that he may not have been entitled to possess," said Representative Frank Wolf, a Republican whose Virginia district includes the NASA Langley Research Center, where Jiang worked.
The FBI arrested Jiang at Dulles International Airport outside Washington, where he had boarded a flight to Beijing, court papers provided by Wolf's office show.
Jiang was arraigned on Monday in U.S. district court in Norfolk, Virginia. A detention hearing is scheduled for Thursday.
He is charged with lying to federal law enforcement agents about computer hardware he planned to take with him to China, the court documents show.
Wolf, who chairs the House Appropriations subcommittee on commerce, justice and science, identified Jiang last week during another hearing on possible security lapses at NASA field centers.
"A recent White House report said that the technologies NASA works on - aerospace and aeronautics - are those that the Chinese have most heavily targeted," Wolf added.

At the Ria de Aveiro Lagoon in Portugal the day starts early for European scientists as they set out to gather samples.
The lagoon offers a rich but fragile 75 square kilometre ecosystem of wetlands, seagrasses and salt marshes used as nursery areas for bivalves, crustaceans, fish and birds.
It is a natural treasure that, as with other European coastal lagoons, is facing huge threats.
“Among the most common problems we find here is the high presence of nutrients in the water. 
These nutrients favour the bloom of green algae. 
The green algae absorb oxygen from the water, and eventually the whole aquatic ecosystem can lose its environmental health and quality. 
These last years we have also found a new trend of pollutants, chemical compounds from drugs and other nanoparticles, that can also challenge the quality of the environment around,” explained Ana Lillebø a biologist and project coordinator at the University of Aveiro/Lagoons.
Climate change could also pose dangerous threats. 
It could alter volumes of water in the lagoon, the temperature and acidity, which could then weaken further an already delicate ecosystem.
Researchers want to know how key vegetable and animal species in the lagoon’s trophic chain would react to sudden changes in their ecosystems.
“We can predict the future climate change patterns with models. 
And if we match those models with our biological research, we can foresee how these crucial species will evolve over time; if they will increase, decrease or if they will simply disappear from the lagoon’s ecosystems,” said Arnaldo Marín Atucha an ecologist at the University of Murcia.
This scientific effort, part of a European Union research project, includes detailed field work in four coastal lagoons around Europe, each with different realities and challenges but with a common urgency in the need to protect them.
Biological data is matched with sophisticated computer modelling.
Researchers try to predict using interactive maps how climate change-induced alterations, but also pressure from tourism, industry or agricultural land use, will affect the lagoons’ health and sustainability.
Per Stalnacke is a water quality expert at the Norwegian Institute for Agricultural and Environmental Research and pointed out: “Of course there is a large uncertainty. 
But we have to remember that we are collecting the best available scientific knowledge into these computer models.
So this is not science fiction”.
The research also involves dealing with the local population.
Scientists organise focus groups with hunters and fishermen to provide scientific information and receive factual data and meaningful feedback on the lagoon’s real potential and also its main weaknesses.
“We provide them with maps basically.
And we asked them to use dots and colours to show us on those maps which areas of the lagoons they feel are developing well and which areas they feel are being threatened.
So besides getting information about which issues there are at stake, we also get the geographic location of them,” explained Geoffrey D. Gooch, Professor of Water & Environmental Policy at the University of Dundee.
It is a three year research effort that scientists, hunters and fishermen hope will help to preserve some quite unique natural ecosystems.
A point underlined by Boaventura Bastos Marrafa, President of the Avanca Hunting & Fishing Association.
“We have the sea, then the sea inlet, then the lagoon.
And then, nothing else except lots of motorways.
There is no more space for wildlife.
So all hunting friendly-spots around this area are in the lagoon.
That is why we, hunters, also have to fight to protect it, and preserve the natural balance of these ecosystems.”
Arnaldo Marín Atucha, an ecologist at the University of Murcia concluded: “Each lagoon is unique.
If we lose this natural heritage, we will also lose a bit of our own identity”. 

Two of the most prominent U.S. investors could upset Michael Dell's $24.4 billion buyout bid for Dell Inc, after billionaire Carl Icahn opened the door to an alliance with Blackstone Group LP to wrest control of the computer maker from its founder.
Icahn said on Monday he has started preliminary talks with Blackstone.
Both sides have made bids that could be superior to the offer on the table from Michael Dell and private equity firm Silver Lake Partners LP.
The backroom negotiations show how what started as a plan by Michael Dell and Silver Lake to take the PC maker private could turn into a months-long process.
Icahn has proposed paying $15 per share for 58 percent of Dell.
Blackstone has indicated it can pay more than $14.25 per share for the whole of the company, all in cash or partly in shares, leaving Dell as a publicly listed company.
The Silver Lake-backed group offered $13.65 per share in cash to take Dell private.
Dell, Silver Lake and Blackstone declined comment.
Icahn, who owns a $1 billion stake in Dell, said both his and Blackstone's offers give the company's largest investors what they wanted most: the ability to retain publicly traded shares of Dell.
Southeastern Asset Management, Dell's largest independent shareholder and one of the most vocal opponents of the Silver Lake plan, said it was pleased about that prospect, as well as the higher offers.
Another investor, Bill Nygren, co-manager of the Oakmark Fund, added: "Given the wide range of estimated values for Dell shares, if all else is nearly equal, we believe a proposal is superior if it allows investors who want to remain invested in Dell the opportunity to do so."
The value of Blackstone's and Icahn's offers depends on how much Dell shares would be worth following a buyout.
However, Blackstone's offer trumps Silver Lake's outright because all shareholders can cash out, if they wish to, at a higher price.
What is more, Blackstone's offer to Dell shareholders of the option to maintain stakes in the company and profit from any upside is likely to be viewed positively by the special committee set up to assess the offers, according to two people familiar with the matter.
The outcome of the auction would determine the future of Dell, which was regarded as a model of innovation as recently as the early 2000s but has struggled to make up for declining market share in the global PC market.
A source familiar with the matter said last week that Dell had slashed its internal forecast for fiscal 2013 operating profit to about $3 billion, down sharply from the $3.7 billion it had predicted previously.
Dell's shares closed up 2.6 percent at $14.51 on Monday, indicating investors expect a deal to be done at a price higher than the Silver Lake bid.
Earlier in the session they touched $14.64, the stock's highest level in 10 months.
"We continue to believe a higher bid than the current $13.65 per share offer will likely be offered but, based on our assumptions, a $15 per share bid may be a threshold," Wells Fargo Securities analyst Maynard Um said in a note.
"We believe a higher Silver Lake/Dell bid might still be a more attractive and strategic option, assuming information regarding the public stub and financial services sale is accurate," he said.
Late on Sunday, two sources close to the matter said that the Silver Lake group had no plans yet to increase or amend its offer until Dell's special committee comes out with a ruling on the rival proposals.
As part of his deal with the special committee of Dell's board that is running the auction process, Michael Dell has to explore the possibility of working with third parties on alternative offers.
On Monday, Dell said he had reaffirmed that commitment.
Still, Michael Dell is very concerned that Blackstone's offer would dismantle the PC maker he founded in 1984, two people close to Michael Dell said.
The founder is worried that the buyout firm's plans would be inconsistent with his strategy to reinvest in the company, the sources said.
Michael Dell is planning to meet with Blackstone to discuss the private equity firm's bid, two other sources familiar with the situation said.
Blackstone made no mention of asset sales in its preliminary offer.
But people familiar with the matter have told Reuters that Blackstone has considered a potential sale of Dell's financial services business as part of its turnaround plan.
Michael Dell's role also remains unclear in a Blackstone-led deal.
The buyout firm has already made an unsuccessful push to recruit Oracle Corp President Mark Hurd to run Dell if it takes over the company, one source familiar with the situation said last week.
A number of issues remain to be addressed, a separate person familiar with the matter said on Monday of Michael Dell.
Among them, what Michael Dell would do if a buyer wanted to sell a business and he did not, the source said.
Potential buyers are likely to want to sit down with Michael Dell to discuss his plans for a privately held Dell Inc in more detail, the source said, adding that Blackstone had not done so yet.
Switching bidding allegiances could preserve an affiliation with the company for Michael Dell, who founded the technology giant at the age of 19 with just $1,000.
Under the Silver Lake deal, he planned to contribute his roughly 16 percent share of Dell's equity, along with cash from his investment firm MSD Capital, and remain CEO of the company. Silver Lake is putting up $1.4 billion.

Mass military rallies, hysterical emotions from civilians after the death of Kim Jong Il and videos threatening to smash the U.S. into oblivion are well-known scenes associated with North Korea.
And sometimes it's the only images many people see of the isolated nation.
They combine to create an extraordinary image, one that has sparked breathless global debate over what to do about the country, while people around the world urge a more pragmatic approach.
Why are people so fascinated?
CNN looked at social media to see what the world is saying about the crisis and the country.

Foreign diplomatic missions in North Korea face an ominous decision after Pyongyang said Friday it could not guarantee the safety of embassies and international organizations in the event of armed conflict.
Tensions on the Korean peninsula remain in a heightened state amid new reports that North Korea has prepared missiles for launch, while South Korea has deployed naval destroyers to its coasts.
The British Foreign Office said North Korea told British officials that it would not be able to guarantee the safety of diplomats in the capital if fighting breaks out.
Several diplomatic missions said the North Koreans held a meeting Friday for ambassadors in which they asked whether anyone needed assistance in evacuating their personnel.
"We are consulting international partners about these developments," the British Foreign Office said in a written statement.
"No decisions have been taken, and we have no immediate plans to withdraw our embassy."
A spokesman for Sweden's ministry of foreign affairs said the North Koreans "did not urge us or ask us to evacuate," but offered assistance for those who wanted to leave.
The Swedish Embassy in North Korea acts "as the United States' interim protecting power and provides basic consular services to U.S. citizens traveling in North Korea," according to the U.S. State Department.
The Swedish Embassy remains open and operational, the spokesman said.
Russian state media reported a more specific suggestion for its diplomats.
North Korea asked the Russian Embassy to consider a possible evacuation of its staff because of the tensions, Denis Samsonov, spokesman for the embassy, told Russian state media.
France's foreign ministry state it was taking the situation "seriously".
It said it had no current plans for evacuations of personnel or French nationals in the country.
The developments come as two medium-range missiles have been loaded onto mobile launchers on the East coast of North Korea, a U.S. official told CNN on Friday.
A second U.S. official said intelligence on that is not definitive.
The account followed a report by South Korea's semi-official Yonhap news agency, citing military sources in Seoul, that the two missiles were ready to be launched.
Yonhap said the missiles have been hidden in an unidentified facility.
In response, South Korea has sent Aegis destroyers equipped with advanced radar systems to both of its coasts, Yonhap said, citing navy sources.
The United States would "not be surprised" if North Korea launched a missile, White House spokesman Jay Carney said Friday.
"We have seen them launch missiles in the past and the United Nations Security Council has repeatedly condemned them as violations of the North's obligations under numerous Security Council resolutions."
New regional tensions were triggered by North Korean saber rattling, including threats to launch nuclear strikes, and the flexing of military prowess by the United States and South Korea in response.
These followed the imposition of stepped up U.N. sanctions against the North after its latest nuclear test in February.
North Korea has also said it planned to restart "without delay" a reactor at its main nuclear complex that it shut down five years ago as part of a deal with the United States, China and four other nations.
Most observers say the North is still years away from having the technology to deliver a nuclear warhead on a missile.
And many analysts say the increasingly belligerent talk is aimed at cementing the domestic authority of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un.
A U.S. State Department spokeswoman said Thursday the situation did "not need to get hotter," reflecting efforts by the Obama administration to ease its rhetoric and cool tensions.
But the latest developments by North Korea, which has accused the United States of pushing the region to the "brink of war," could signal a missile launch soon, officials have said.
The missile components, U.S. and South Korean officials have said, are consistent with those of a Musudan missile, which has a 2,500-mile range, meaning it could threaten South Korea, Japan and Southeast Asia.
It is believed a missile launch would be a "test" launch rather than a targeted strike.
That is because it appears the North Koreans have only moved the components so far.
The United States is waiting to see whether North Korea issues a customary notice to its airmen and mariners to stay out of the region.
Communication intercepts in recent days also seem to show that Pyongyang might be planning to launch a mobile ballistic missile in the coming days or weeks, another U.S. official said.
Wednesday, the United States announced it was sending ballistic missile defenses to Guam, a Western Pacific territory that is home to U.S. naval and air bases.
North Korea has cited those bases when listing possible targets for missile attacks.
Pentagon officials, while decrying North Korean rhetoric, said recent announcements of U.S. military deployments in response to belligerent statements by Pyongyang may have contributed to the escalating tensions.
As the bombast reaches a fever pitch, the United States is refining its message.
The Pentagon now says it is working to decrease the temperature as it maintains a frank and vigilant stance toward the threats.
Starting Wednesday, North Korea also barred South Korean workers and managers from entering the Kaesong industrial complex, an economic cooperation zone that sits on the North's side of the border but houses operations of scores of South Korean companies.
It also repeated a threat from the weekend to shut down the complex, where more than 50,000 North Koreans work.



North Korea has moved a missile with “considerable range” to its east coast, South Korea's defense minister said Thursday, but he added that there are no signs that Pyongyang is preparing for a full-scale conflict.
The report came hours after North Korea's military warned that it has been authorized to attack the U.S. using “smaller, lighter and diversified” nuclear weapons.
It was the North's latest war cry against America in recent weeks.
The reference to smaller weapons could be a claim that Pyongyang has improved its nuclear technology.
South Korean Defense Minister Kim Kwan-jin said he did not know the reasons behind the North's missile movement, and that it “could be for testing or drills.”
He dismissed reports in Japanese media that the missile could be a KN-08, which is believed to be a long-range missile that if operable could hit the United States.
Kim told lawmakers at a parliamentary committee meeting that the missile has “considerable range” but not enough to hit the U.S. mainland.
The range he described could refer to a mobile North Korean missile known as the Musudan, which has a range of 3,000 kilometers (1,800 miles).
That would make Japan and South Korea potential targets — along with U.S. bases in both countries — but there are doubts about the missile's accuracy.
The Pentagon announced that it will deploy a missile defense system to the U.S. Pacific territory of Guam to strengthen regional protection against a possible attack.
Experts say North Korea has not demonstrated that it has missiles capable of long range or accuracy.
Some suspect that long-range missiles unveiled by Pyongyang at a parade last year were actually mockups.
“From what we know of its existing inventory, North Korea has short- and medium-range missiles that could complicate a situation on the Korean Peninsula (and perhaps reach Japan), but we have not seen any evidence that it has long-range missiles that could strike the continental U.S., Guam or Hawaii,” James Hardy, Asia Pacific editor of IHS Jane's Defence Weekly, wrote in a recent analysis.
Kim Kwan-jin said that if North Korea were preparing for a full-scale conflict, there would be signs including the mobilization of a number of units, including supply and rear troops, but South Korean military officials have found no such preparations.
“(North Korea's recent threats) are rhetorical threats.
I believe the odds of a full-scale provocation are small,” he said.
But he added that North Korea might mount a small-scale provocation such as its 2010 shelling of a South Korean island, an attack that killed four people.
Pyongyang has been railing against joint U.S. and South Korean military exercises taking place in South Korea and has expressed anger over tightened U.N. sanctions for its February nuclear test.
Many of the threats come in the middle of the night in Asia — daytime for the U.S. audience.\
Analysts say the threats are probably efforts to provoke softer policies from South Korea, to win diplomatic talks with Washington and to solidify the image of young North Korean leader Kim Jong Un.
At times, Pyongyang has gone beyond rhetoric.
On Tuesday, it announced it would restart a plutonium reactor it had shut down in 2007.
A U.S. research institute said Wednesday that satellite imagery shows that construction needed for the restart has already begun.
For a second day Thursday, North Korean border authorities denied entry to South Koreans who manage jointly run factories in the North Korean city of Kaesong.
South Koreans already at the plant were being allowed to return home.
Defense Minister Kim said South Korea has prepared a military contingency plan should North Korea hold South Korean workers hostage in Kaesong, Kim said.
He wouldn't elaborate.
Outraged over comments in the South about possible hostage-taking and a military response from Seoul, a North Korean government-run committee threatened to pull North Korean workers out of Kaesong as well.
North Korea's military statement Thursday, from an unnamed spokesman from the General Bureau of the Korean People's Army, said its troops had been authorized to counter U.S. “aggression” with “powerful practical military counteractions,” including nuclear weapons.
It said America's “hostile policy” and “nuclear threat” against North Korea “will be smashed by the strong will of all the united service personnel and people and cutting-edge smaller, lighter and diversified nuclear strike means.”

There are plenty of buyers as tickets go on sale for the first time.
The state lottery hopes bigger jackpots will mean more revenue.
When America got Powerball fever last November, Californians felt left out.
Many asked friends in other states to buy tickets, and some even drove to the Arizona border when the jackpot for the multistate game reached $587.5 million.
On Monday, Californians no longer had to worry about crossing state lines, because Powerball finally came to the state. Lottery die-hards lined up all across California for their 1-in-175-million chance to win.
"The Powerball came to me," he said. "I didn't go to the Powerball this time."
Powerball marks a further effort by the state lottery to go beyond Scratchers to larger games with much higher jackpots.
Last year, the state lottery got a taste of possibilities when its Mega Millions multistate game grew to a $656-million prize.
That game alone added $300 million in sales for the lottery over two months, resulting in a 27% increase in total revenues for the year.
Powerball is even larger than Mega Millions, with a starting jackpot that is more than three times as large.
The games are similar — requiring players to match up to six numbers — and the odds of hitting the jackpot in each of the games are almost exactly the same: 1 in about 175 million.
"It sounds ridiculous to say, but if the jackpot is $56 million, it just doesn't motivate people the way a $656-million jackpot does," said Alex Traverso, a spokesman for the state lottery.
The typical lottery player is loyal and plays as part of a routine.
With their huge jackpots that generate news and online buzz, Powerball and Mega Millions can draw large numbers of people who rarely play, as well as lottery regulars.
Lottery revenues flattened at the start of the recession. But last year, sales jumped from $3.4 billion to $4.4 billion, with much of the increase due to new customers who came for that $656-million jackpot.
The lottery sent $1.2 billion of that revenue to California schools, as required by law.
The arrival of Powerball in California came with an $8.4-million marketing campaign and "launch events" at the Grove in Los Angeles and the Embarcadero Center in San Francisco.
But it also sparked fresh criticism from those who believe the government should not be in the gambling business.
While Powerball generates bigger jackpots, critics say multistate lotteries are even harder to win.
They also expressed concern about the $2 ticket price, double the price of a Mega Millions ticket.
"Expanding the lottery is bad for individuals," said the Rev. James B. Butler of the California Coalition Against Gambling Expansion, adding that many of the customers are lower-income people looking to hit it big.
"It will exploit those who can afford it least."
Still, registers rang nearly nonstop Monday at Hawthorne's Bluebird Liquor, considered a hot spot by lottery regulars.
"Powerball to the people," read the headline of one of the newspapers sold outside.
The store began selling Powerball tickets at 7 a.m. and by noon, employee Eduardo Duran said, about 8,000 had been purchased.
"As far as business, you can see it's good," he said, gesturing to a line that snaked out the door.
As Duran and two others tried to help customers quickly, the phone rang.
"Thank you for calling the lucky Bluebird," Duran answered.
A woman asked how long the wait was to buy a ticket.
"All day," Duran told her.
"We're going to have a line all day."



It was the Starbucks sting.
The defining moment in the KPMG insider-trading scandal took place over coffee at a Starbucks in the San Fernando Valley, where the accountant at the center of the case was set up by his longtime friend.
Scott London thought the friend, jeweler Bryan Shaw, invited him for a casual get-together until the man handed London an envelope containing $5,000 in cash.
It was clear the money was a payoff for supplying privileged information that London gleaned from his job at KPMG.
Unbeknownst to London, the FBI had orchestrated the sting and was secretly photographing it.
A few days later, FBI agents showed up at London's Agoura Hills home.
They confronted him with the photos and advised him to hire a lawyer.
"They just showed up and said, 'You're subject to an investigation,'" London said in an interview Tuesday night with The Times.
"I felt about as bad as you could feel. It was as if everything I had earned and accomplished was gone."
Late Wednesday, Shaw issued a statement acknowledging his role in the insider trading.
"I cannot begin to apologize for my incredibly stupid actions.
There is no excuse for my wrongful conduct."
Shaw, whose family runs Shaw Diamond Co. in Encino, said he "profited substantially" from stock tips that London gave him in multiple companies.
London told The Times Tuesday that he began giving tips to Shaw because his friend's jewelry company had run into financial trouble.
"I expect that my actions will result in significant civil and criminal consequences, but I realize that this is the painful price I will pay for my transgressions," he said.
Shaw allegedly profited from information London provided to him from 2010 to 2012 on two of London's L.A.-area clients, nutritional products company Herbalife Ltd. and footwear maker Skechers USA Inc.
KPMG last week fired London, who had been an L.A-based partner.
The firm resigned Tuesday as the outside auditor for the two companies.
Herbalife and Skechers are now scrambling to find new accountants.
London and Shaw are awaiting the next step: potential civil action and criminal prosecution.
The Justice Department and Securities and Exchange Commission are investigating.
The trading scandal is taking a big toll on London, who had been at KPMG for nearly three decades, his lawyer, Harland Braun, said Wednesday.
"His life is ruined.
He's 50 years old.
He's going to lose the rest of his career, humiliate his family, perhaps lose his freedom," Braun said.
His client received $25,000 to $35,000 from Shaw over the years — not much for someone whose income was "way into six figures," his lawyer said.
The stakes in the scandal are high for accounting powerhouse KPMG, which is scrambling to retain credibility with clients.
The scandal also tainted Herbalife, which already had been ensnared in a separate controversy over the legitimacy of its accounting practices.
But as much as anything, the sting that nabbed London demonstrates the lengths to which the government is going in pursuit of wrongdoers large and small.
As part of an intensive dragnet, securities regulators have stepped up measures in recent years to root out insider trading.
They've enlisted stock exchanges and brokerage firms to aid the cause.
"I would call it a crusade," said Ernest Badway, a former SEC enforcement attorney who is now a defense attorney in New York.
"This is something they just are locked onto — almost with a religious fervor — and they are not going to let it go, at least in the near term."


Even as U.S. officials this week awaited the arrival of a sample of the new bird flu virus from China - typically the first step in making a flu vaccine - government-backed researchers had already begun testing a "seed" strain of the virus made from the genetic code posted on the Internet.
This new, faster approach is the result of a collaboration among the U.S. government, vaccine maker Novartis and a unit of the J. Craig Venter Institute, which is using synthetic biology - in which scientists take the genetic code of the virus and use it as a recipe to build the virus from scratch.
It was an idea born in the aftermath of the 2009 H1N1 pandemic, in which production delays and poor-quality seed strain slowed delivery of the vaccine until October, late enough that people were already sick with swine flu.
The new method has shaved two weeks off the vaccine-making process.
It will take five to six months to ramp up production, but even weeks could make a difference in the case of a potentially deadly flu pandemic, said Robin Robinson, director of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority, an agency that falls under the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response.
"We'll take it," Robinson said.
"If the virus turns out to be a tough one, that could be very important."
So far, at least 33 people have been infected and 10 have died from the strain of bird flu known as H7N9 first found in humans last month.
When the genetic sequence for the virus became available on March 30, Robinson said, U.S. health officials decided to try the new synthetic biology technique to try to speed the process.
That's when Novartis and Venter's company, Synthetic Genomics Vaccines Inc, went to work.
By Thursday, April 4, they had synthetic DNA ready and had started to grow the virus in dog kidney cells.
Mike Shaw, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said a sample of the virus arrived from China on Thursday afternoon.
That would normally be the starting point of making a seed vaccine.
Scientists would take the sample, grow it and ensure it would grow well in chicken eggs or cells.
That involves a certain amount of guesswork, however.
The new process of building the virus based on its genetic code allows "almost guaranteed success," Shaw said.
"That is because you're creating a virus that is almost tailor-made," he said.
Shaw said the CDC plans to take a vaccine candidate at least to the stage of human safety trials.


Payday loans trap people in a cycle of debt, U.S. watchdog says
The average borrower takes out 11 loans a year and pays a total of $574 in fees, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau says in a new report.
Payday loans often trap consumers in a cycle of debt, a new report by the federal government finds.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau found that the average consumer took out 11 loans during a 12-month period, paying a total of $574 in fees — not including loan principal.
A quarter of borrowers paid $781 or more in fees.
"There is high sustained use — which we consider to be not only when a consumer rolls over the loan, but also when he pays it off and returns very quickly to take out another one," Richard Cordray, director of the bureau, said in a conference call with reporters Tuesday.
Although the loans are often marketed as temporary, to be repaid in a single pay cycle, the report found that the median number of days a borrower remained indebted was 155.
The report also said that it considers so-called deposit advances — offered by certain major banks, including Wells Fargo & Co. in San Francisco — to be essentially the same as payday loans.
"What we found is there is not much difference, from the consumer's perspective, between payday loans and deposit advance loans," Cordray said.
"They have similar purposes and, as it turns out, similar usage by consumers."
The Community Financial Services Assn. of America, which represents the payday loan industry, said in a statement that it took consumer protection seriously but that the loans provide an essential service.
"In our current economy and constricted credit market, consumers need access to credit to deal with periodic and unexpected financial challenges," Dennis Shaul, chief executive of the group, said in the statement.


Herbalife Ltd. has now notched 17 consecutive quarters in which its profits sailed past Wall Street projections.
The Los Angeles nutritional products company told investors Monday that earnings during the first three months of the year climbed nearly 10% to $118.8 million while sales hit a record $1.1 billion.
Top executives will host a call with analysts to discuss the results Tuesday morning.
Despite the impressive numbers, executives will have plenty of questions to answer.
Herbalife has been battling a hedge fund manager's allegations for four months that it operates a pyramid scheme.
A former distributor made similar allegations this month in a lawsuit, filed in federal court in Los Angeles.
And it still has not replaced its auditor, KPMG, which resigned after a senior partner at the accounting firm was accused of insider trading.
That controversy did not stop people from buying the company's line of meal-replacement shake mixes, protein bars, juices, teas and personal care products.
It earned $118.8 million, or $1.10 a share, compared with $108.2 million, or 88 cents, a year ago.
The company had forecast earnings of $1.03 to $1.07 a share, and analysts expected $1.07.
"We continue to deliver record results in sales and profitability as our independent distributors successfully execute numerous growth strategies," Herbalife chief executive Michael O. Johnson said in a statement.
"Obesity and poor nutrition are global public health problems.
Our distributors are proud to be part of the solution."
The good numbers come after a rocky year for Herbalife.
The company's shares were hammered last May after hedge fund manager David Einhorn questioned its business model during an analyst call.
Seven months later, Bill Ackman, who manages hedge fund Pershing Square Capital Management, accused Herbalife of operating a pyramid scheme and bet $1 billion that its shares would fall.
This month KPMG resigned as the company's auditor after one of the accounting firms' senior partners was accused of insider trading in Herbalife stock.
KPMG withdrew its approval of three years of the company's financial reports.
As a result of KPMG's resignation, Herbalife said its first-quarter earnings report "has not been reviewed by an outside independent accounting firm as required by the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission."
"The company's audit committee and management believe that the interim financial information presented herein fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the company," Herbalife said in its quarterly report.
The company has not said when it expects to employ a new accounting firm.
Herbalife said it would file an amendment to its first-quarter report "as soon as practicable," after a new accounting firm is employed and reviews the numbers.
Not everyone on Wall Street was swayed by the skepticism about the 33-year-old company.
Billionaire investor Carl Icahn bought 15% of Herbalife's shares, betting that Ackman was wrong and that the company would continue to thrive.
Herbalife allowed Icahn to nominate two directors to the company's board; shareholders approved Icahn's nominees last week at their annual meeting in Beverly Hills.
Analysts also remain bullish on the company.
Seven recommend buying the company's stock, while three suggest holding it.
They have an average 12-month estimated price of $55.57 a share, more than 40% higher than its Monday close.
Brian Wang, a Barclays analyst, said in a research note that the company has benefited by allowing its distributors to sell products in small quantities through nutrition clubs, instead of its past model of selling exclusively in bulk.
"This shift has driven significant growth, and we expect this momentum to continue," Wang said.
Timothy Ramey, an analyst with D.A. Davidson & Co., called it "another blowout quarter" for Herbalife with "solid growth across all segments."
He estimates the stock will more than double within the next 18 months.
Ackman's well-publicized criticism has had an economic effect on Herbalife.
The company said in the quarterly report that it spent $9.5 million on "legal and advisory services" to defend itself against Ackman's attack.
The hedge fund manager said he was not moved by Herbalife's strong sales numbers.
"Earnings are irrelevant for a pyramid scheme," he said in an email.
Founded in 1980, the company sells its products in more than 80 countries.
Herbalife shares closed at $38.75 on Monday, up 48 cents, or 1.2%.
The company announced its first-quarter results after the market closed.


The Solar Impulse leaves Moffett Field near San Francisco on its way to Phoenix, its first stop in the coast-to-coast flight.
A spindly solar-powered aircraft took to the skies Friday from Moffett Federal Airfield, near San Francisco, on a pioneering coast-to-coast flight that will not use one ounce of fossil fuel.
The plane, called Solar Impulse HB-SIA, has an immense 208-foot wing covered with 12,000 solar cells that soak up the sun's rays and power the plane's four electric motors while simultaneously charging batteries.
That means the plane can keep flying at night.
The goal is not speed, because it's traveling a leisurely 43 mph.
Nor is it endurance, because it's making the trip in five legs.
Rather, the objective is to showcase clean technology.
So while the first leg is an excruciatingly long 18-hour trip from Moffett Field to Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, the flight was enthralling to pilot Bertrand Piccard.
"It's never boring because it's the most revolutionary airplane that exists — an airplane that flies day and night with no fuel," he said a few hours into his trip, soaring at around 13,000 feet above Northern California.
He took off from Moffett Field at about 6 a.m. Pacific time and is set to land in Phoenix at 1 a.m. Mountain time Saturday.
In all, the cross-country voyage is expected to take about two months.
After Phoenix, there are stops in Dallas, St. Louis, Washington, D.C., and finally at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York.
The solar plane was created by Piccard and engineer Andre Borschberg, both Swiss nationals. 
The two have raised money since 2003 from corporate sponsors and investors, such as Swiss watch manufacturer Omega and Belgian chemicals group Solvay.
Solar Impulse flew for the first time in 2009, soaring 3 feet off the ground for 28 seconds.
Work continued and by the next year Solar Impulse made a 26-hour flight in Switzerland on the world's first solar-powered night flight.
In 2011 the plane made its first international flight from Switzerland to Belgium to France.
Last year it took on the first solar-powered intercontinental flight, flying from Europe to North Africa in eight legs over two months.
The plane is slow-moving and has a cruise altitude of 21,000 feet.
So when Solar Impulse's creators proposed a flight across the U.S., they had to work with the Federal Aviation Administration to ensure that there would be no danger to commercial aircraft.
"Everybody has been trying to figure out how to integrate such an aircraft into the heavy air traffic of the West Coast," Borschberg said. 
"It hasn't been done before."
Everything on the Solar Impulse HB-SIA aircraft has been designed to save energy.
It weighs just 3,527 pounds because of its lightweight structure, flight instrumentation and engines.
There are four pods fixed under the wings and each contains an electric motor with a maximum power output of 10 horsepower.
Because the aircraft has only one seat, Piccard and Borschberg plan on taking turns flying the plane. 
One will follow the other in a turboprop aircraft to the various locations.
People who are interested in the trip can follow virtually at the website http://www.solarimpulse.com.
Piccard and Borschberg are planning to fly around the world in a second plane in 2015.
That flight will take place over 20 days and 20 nights, with several stops along the way.


Restaurants founded by Jeffrey Weinstein, considered a forefather of the so-called better burger craze, let diners customize their meals using a long checklist.
Jeffrey Weinstein once swept through 19 Denver restaurants in six hours, a feat that most people would characterize as gluttony.
Weinstein calls it research.
Eating out is more than a hobby for the founder and co-chief executive of the Counter, a growing Culver City chain of build-your-own-burger eateries. 
In its 10 years, the company has been mentioned on "The Oprah Winfrey Show," adored by reviewers and touted as one of the forefathers of the so-called better burger craze.
Weinstein, a culinary school grad, spends his time at the helm reading cookbooks, determining whether his Midwest menus are ready for spicy Sriracha sauce (yes) and, occasionally, scoping out competing eateries.
And he's not alone.
He said he catches spies from other eateries doing the same "all the time" at the Counter, some even wearing shirts with their employers' logo.
"At least try to be incognito," he scoffed.
Any undercover agents were well disguised during a recent lunch with Weinstein, 37, at the Counter's downtown Los Angeles outpost.
Motown tunes and rock music throbbed as patrons crowded at the bar, the high tables and the maroon booths. 
As in all 38 restaurants worldwide, diners created customized burgers by marking off ingredients — including dozens of toppings — on a long checklist.
Weinstein, in a checkered shirt and dark jeans, his ever-present iPhone on the table, dished about his favorite Counter treat: two-thirds of a pound of medium-rare beef with smoked bacon, fried egg, jalapenos, roasted garlic aioli and cheddar cheese atop a toasted English muffin.
Weinstein said his privately owned burger business is dedicated to the "everyman." 
Case in point: the three firefighters that Weinstein's co-CEO, Craig Albert, once saw chowing down on Counter burgers — next to actor Harrison Ford.
The burgers accommodate a customer base that is increasingly diverse, well-traveled and particular about food, Weinstein said. 
By giving patrons control over their meals, the Counter can whip up healthful options for the body-conscious, gluten-free versions for the allergy-prone and decadent displays for the self-indulgent.
"This is the Me Generation, with their personalized phones and apps," Weinstein said. 
"Their food should be the same way, so they can come in a few times a week and not get bored."
Weinstein said he's wary of "growth for growth's sake." 
He said the Counter avoided same-store sales declines by being careful about expansion. 
He and Albert own just four Counter locations and franchise out the rest.
Weinstein's vision for the Counter initially involved as many as 600 units nationwide before he scaled back projections to roughly 250 locations, with as many as 15 openings in 2013.
The company survived the recession with flat comparable sales and is now profitable enough to internally finance future build-outs, he said.
One such initiative: the birth of the Counter's so-called baby brother, a new chain called Built designed for college kids, travelers and other on-the-go guests.
The burgers there are smaller, less expensive and made to order on an assembly line like the burritos at Chipotle Mexican Grill. 
Instead of the Counter's standard 3,000-square-foot store size, each Built location will be about 1,750 square feet, allowing it to fit inside airports and university campuses.
The concept, which opened last month near USC, is the Counter's answer to the burgeoning fast-casual industry, which includes rapidly growing brands such as Chipotle and Panera Bread.
Weinstein worries about not only competitors but also larger forces such as looming healthcare reforms, proposed food labeling regulations and rising commodity prices.
The original Counter burger cost $6.50. Inflation and price increases have since pushed it to $9 or more.

For the first half of the 20th century, the cell was a mysterious, unfathomable entity. 
Nutrients went in and hormones, wastes and other products came out. 
But what happened in between was anybody's guess.
Light microscopes could reveal the rough details of the cell's interior, but not with enough precision to illuminate function. 
Chemical studies were rudimentary at best.
Three men changed that. 
Albert Claude of the Rockefeller Institute — now University — adapted the electron microscope to image cells, allowing a much higher resolution. 
He also began the practice of what is known as differential sedimentation, in which a cell was broken up with a mortar and pestle and centrifuged, separating components by weight, and discovered the energy-producing organelles known as mitochondria.
George Palade of Rockefeller refined both techniques and used them to discover ribosomes, the cellular compartments where proteins are synthesized, and the endoplasmic reticulum, an extensive network in the cell that carries ribosomes and transports materials needed by the cell.
Dr. Christian de Duve, who divided his time between Rockefeller in New York City and the Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium, further refined differential sedimentation and used it to discover lysosomes, the cell's stomach that is responsible for destroying unwanted material, and peroxisomes, which use hydrogen peroxide to destroy certain other unwanted substances.
For their efforts, the three shared the 1974 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. 
In awarding the prize, the Nobel committee said the men's "accomplishments have been largely responsible for the creation of modern cell biology. 
What used to be a cell with components, the reality of which was often a matter of dispute and functions as a rule unknown, is now a system of great organizational sophistication with units for the production of components essential to life and units for disposal of worn out parts and for defense against foreign organisms and substances."
De Duve, 95, died Saturday at his home in Nethen, Belgium, according to Rockefeller University. 
He decided to end his life with euthanasia, which is legal in Belgium. 
He had been suffering from cancer and atrial fibrillation, and his health problems were exacerbated by a recent fall in his home.
In a recent interview published after his death by the Belgian newspaper Le Soir, de Duve said, "It would be an exaggeration to say I'm not afraid of my death, but I'm not afraid of what comes after because I am not a believer. 
When I disappear, I will disappear, there'll be nothing left."
De Duve's greatest discoveries were almost accidental, resulting from anomalous laboratory findings that piqued his interest and led him down new and unexpected pathways. 
For years, he had been interested in insulin and, in the late 1940s, was attempting to study its metabolism in liver cells.
To extract the appropriate enzymes, he ground up the cells with an electric blender and used differential sedimentation to isolate various portions of the cell. 
Because it was easy to monitor, he used an abundant enzyme called glucose 6-phosphatase. 
His initial experiments, however, indicated that destroying the cells with a blender broke them down too much, and he decided to switch to a much gentler technique.
To his surprise, with the gentler technique, the researchers found much lower levels of glucose 6-phosphatase. 
But when they stored portions of the isolated material in the refrigerator for a few days, they found that the activity of the enzyme increased. 
This suggested to de Duve that the enzymes in the cell were protected by a membrane, which slowly disintegrated in the refrigerator. 
This also made sense because the enzymes worked better in an acidic environment, while the interior of a cell is neutral.
"My curiosity got the better of me," de Duve wrote in his Nobel autobiography, "and as a result, I never elucidated the mechanism of insulin." 
In fact, it took researchers 30 more years to figure that out.
He concluded that the membranes that protected the enzymes formed small organelles inside the cell that he called lysosomes, or lytic bodies. 
Researchers have subsequently discovered at least 50 different enzymes that are contained in the lysosome.
In 1955, de Duve and Alex B. Novikoff of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine used the electron microscope to image lysosomes in partially purified cellular fractions.
The lysosome's function is to engulf and destroy invading bacteria, toxins, unwanted cellular products and dying cells. 
Failure of any part of this system can have disastrous effects on the cell and the organism carrying it. 
De Duve showed that lysosomes play a critical role in a number of human diseases.
He identified, for example, a group of illnesses known collectively as disorders of glycogen storage, which arise when faulty enzymes in the lysosome cannot properly break down components of the cellular membranes, allowing them to accumulate in the cell. 
One of these, for example, called Tay-Sachs disease, is a congenital neurological disorder that typically kills its victims by the age of 5.
De Duve studied another enzyme called monoamine oxidase, which was similar to enzymes of the lysosome. 
It was actually located elsewhere in the cell, in the organelles that he dubbed peroxisomes because they use hydrogen peroxide to destroy foreign materials. 
Peroxisomes break down foreign substances, such as alcohol, and they play a role in sugar metabolism.
Christian Rene de Duve was born Oct. 2, 1917, in Thames-Ditton, just outside London. 
His Belgian parents had moved there to escape World War I, but the family returned to Belgium after the war. 
His travels to see friends in England and family in Germany, combined with his education in Flemish and French in Belgium, made him fluent in four languages.
He enrolled in the Jesuit Catholic University of Louvain, where he majored in ancient humanities. 
He continued in the medical school, receiving his medical degree in 1941. 
When World War II broke out, he enlisted in the Belgian army and became a medic. 
His unit was shipped to the south of France, where it was almost immediately captured by the Germans.
As the group was being marched to a prison camp, de Duve jumped on to the running board of a passing car and escaped. 
At that point, he concluded that he had had enough war and returned to Louvain to finish his medical studies. 
Deciding that he preferred research, he pursued an advanced degree in chemistry, writing his thesis on insulin.
After graduation, he did postdoctoral work in Sweden and St. Louis, working with four Nobel laureates. 
In 1947, he joined the medical school at Louvain, teaching biochemistry and performing research. 
In 1962, he accepted a post at Rockefeller, dividing his time between the two labs. 
He remained on the faculty of both until his retirement in the late 1980s.
De Duve helped found the American Society for Cell Biology and, in 1971, he created the International Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology at Louvain. 
In 1997, the latter was renamed the Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology. 
In his later years, he focused on the evolution of life and wrote several books about the subject.
His wife of 65 years, the former Janine Herman, died in 2008. 
De Duve is survived by two sons, Thierry and Alain; two daughters, Anne and Francoise; two brothers, Pierre and Daniel; seven grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.

Behind the hostility seems to lie wide discontent with the perceived arrogance and intolerance of the leader, who has rejected parallels to the 'Arab Spring.'
By Glen Johnson and Patrick J. McDonnell, Los Angeles Times 
June 3, 2013, 8:47 p.m.
ISTANBUL, Turkey — What began as local dispute about threatened green space in this metropolis has morphed into a nationwide movement protesting what critics say is the heavy-handed style and increasingly Islamist agenda of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
After four days of protests, however, the staying power of a spontaneous movement lacking national leadership is far from clear. 
Erdogan retains substantial support, has his eyes on a run for president next year and seems unlikely to be forced from office.
All the same, a country long lauded as an economic juggernaut and democratic model for the Muslim world is abruptly faced with its most violent street protests in years. 
A police crackdown widely denounced as excessive has spurred a kind of referendum of the streets against the three-time prime minister.
PHOTO: Unrest in Turkey continues
Late Monday, thousands of protesters filled central Taksim Square again. 
And police once more peppered demonstrators near the square with tear gas, leaving a caustic cloud over the iconic patch of downtown.
Running battles between police and protesters were reported during the day in Ankara, the capital, and demonstrators also took to the streets in coastal Izmir and several other cities.
Although the sudden spark and the youth-led street protests are reminiscent of the "Arab Spring" rebellions, Turkey is a thriving democracy with a vibrant economy that bears little resemblance to the stultified autocracies that ruled Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and Yemen. 
Nor does Turkey's multiparty political system resemble the four-decade rule of the Assad family and the Baath Party in neighboring Syria.
In fact, Turkey has been regarded as a model for countries such as Egypt trying to emerge from decades of authoritarian rule, modernize their economies and establish democratic rule.
The country is also a key U.S. ally, the eastern bulwark of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and its government aspires to become a member of the European Union.
Earlier Monday, this city spanning Asia and Europe appeared to be returning to a semblance of workweek normality, as workers and demonstrators cleared rubble and debris left after a weekend of street battles. 
But after nightfall crowds again assembled in Taksim Square and some clashes were reported.
"The problem is Erdogan," said a protester who gave his name as Burak, a scarf covering his mouth and swimming goggles stretched around his head to protect him from tear gas. 
"He is imbued with authoritarianism. He can never change."
Video showed police dispersing protesters with tear gas, water cannons, rubber bullets and batons. 
A doctor's group said more than 2,300 had been injured and at least one protester had been killed, apparently after being hit by a car.
Erdogan's Justice and Development Party, riding the nation's economic success, won about half the vote in the most recent parliamentary elections.
The economy grew by 8.5% in 2011 and 2.5% last year.
The protests appear to have evolved without national leadership and absent the urging of Turkey's formal opposition parties, though several opposition leaders joined in denouncing what they said was an overreaction by police.
Erdogan blamed the opposition Republican People's Party and "extremist" groups, while also lashing out at social media, a key opposition organizing tool. 
Published photos of the protesters cleaning up litter after rallies tended to counter the extremist label, however.
Investors seemed anxious about the globally broadcast images of chaos in Turkey's streets, as the nation's main stock exchange dropped by 10% by day's end. 
The nation's major confederation of public workers unions reportedly said it would stage a two-day strike beginning Tuesday in opposition to the crackdown on protests.
Behind the hostility toward Erdogan lies what appears to be widespread discontent with the prime minister's perceived arrogance and intolerance for dissenting views on signature initiatives including Islamist-inspired restrictions on alcohol sales, curbs on the media, pro-business development schemes and the government's aggressive policy of aiding rebels in Syria.
Erdogan, a former mayor of Istanbul, has dismissed the protesters as hooligans and extremists and rejected parallels to the "Arab Spring" turmoil. 
Anyone making such comparisons "knows nothing about this country," Erdogan told reporters. 
He singled out Twitter as a repository of "the worst of lies."
The government has not backed down on its plans for a shopping mall and residential complex in the park alongside Taksim Square, the issue that set off the protests. 
But Erdogan has said that a museum could be part of the redevelopment plan.
Protesters appear to be mostly young and secular in nature. 
But there are also indications that older people and pious Muslims not enamored of Erdogan's abrasive style have joined in.
Beyond calling for Erdogan's resignation, demonstrators don't seem to have a clear set of broad demands, just vague slogans for greater freedom and political transparency.
"We have lost faith in our politicians," said Emra Tashal, standing in Taksim Square. 
"We need a government that can carry us forward."
The prime minister's self-assurance — his critics call it hubris — was evident in his decision to leave the country Monday on a previously planned trip to North Africa, where many admire his style of Islamist-tinged democracy.
The prime minister appears to retain considerable support among conservative business elements who have prospered under his rule.
"These protesters are nothing," said Ahmet Bersoz, a storekeeper whose shop sits on the fringes of the poor Kurdish neighborhood of Tarlabasi. 
"He [Erdogan] brought money and business to Turkey. He is developing our country."
The prime minister, who has hinted he could easily marshal "a million" supporters to the streets, dwarfing the ranks of protesters, has preferred to restrain his backers.
So far there has yet to be a major counter-protest to that by the tens of thousands who have been vocally calling for Erdogan's resignation. 
But there were signs of fissure even in Erdogan's Justice and Development Party. 
Turkish President Abdullah Gul defended the right of citizens to protest, taking a softer line than the prime minister.
"Democracy does not only mean elections," Gul said, in counterpoint to Erdogan's suggestion that the ballot box, not the street, is the appropriate place to voice differences of opinion. 
"There is nothing more natural than being able to voice those differences."
Special correspondent Johnson reported from Istanbul and Times staff writer McDonnell from Beirut. 


Turkey's prime minister condemns anti-government protests
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan returns from a trip abroad to a nation in turmoil. He calls for an end to protests that began over an Istanbul development project.
By Glen Johnson, Los Angeles Times 
June 7, 2013, 2:39 p.m.
ISTANBUL, Turkey —Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan returned to Turkey on Friday morning in a defiant mood, calling for an end to the anti-government protests that have rocked the nation during the last week.
In a speech from atop an open-air bus to thousands of supporters, Erdogan, back from a four-day trip to North Africa, said, "These protests must end immediately."
"No power but Allah can stop Turkey's rise," continued Erdogan during an address to the scores of Justice and Development Party faithful who had gathered at Istanbul Ataturk Airport, according to local news reports.
The speech largely scuttled hopes that Erdogan would strike a more conciliatory tone upon his return.
Tens of thousands of protesters have taken to the streets across Turkey over the last week after a bruising police crackdown on demonstrators rallying against plans to demolish Gezi Park, one of Istanbul's last major green spaces, to make way for a shopping mall and a replica of Ottoman-era barracks.
Erdogan later said the plans for the shopping center would be shelved, but authorities would press ahead with the rest of the project, including green space that he suggested would be "far better than the current park."
The protests quickly morphed into a broader display of discontent with Erdogan, whom the demonstrators — largely secular and middle-class youth — accuse of authoritarianism and political exclusion. 
They also believe Erdogan is pursuing an Islamist agenda.
"They say I am the prime minister of only 50%," Erdogan told his supporters, referring to the vote secured by his party in the 2011 general election. 
"It's not true. We have served the whole of the 76 million from the east to the west."
Deniz Halman, a student who stood in Gezi Park on Friday, was not impressed.
"People don't care about his speech," Halman said. 
"He's become a dictator. 
Other politicians are seeing this and saying to us, 'We have got your message.'"
Turkish President Abdullah Gul has spent much of the last four days doing damage control, widely interpreted as an effort to offset Erdogan's incendiary rhetoric regarding the protesters, whom he has characterized as hooligans and extremists "running wild."
"If there are objections, there is nothing more natural than voicing them," the Hurriyet Daily News quoted Gul as saying this week. 
"Everyone should show restraint. All the messages with good intentions were received, and what is necessary will be done."
Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arinc offered an apology Tuesday to the protesters assailed by police during the initial raid on Gezi Park. 
However, Erdogan on Friday said the "police are doing their duty."
"These protests, which have turned into vandalism and utter lawlessness, must end immediately," he said.
The redevelopment of the Taksim Square area is but one of a number of controversial projects pushed through by Erdogan and his Justice and Development Party, or AKP — a center-right party steeped in Islamic ideology — despite widespread opposition as Istanbul's green spaces diminish.
The recent destruction of an old and much-loved cinema to make way for a shopping mall also sparked outrage.
Erdogan reportedly is planning a third Istanbul airport and has announced plans for a mosque visible "from every corner of the Bosporus," adding to the 17,000 mosques that have been built during his decade in power.
Turkey's economy has grown rapidly during his tenure, driven by increased foreign investment and a focus on large-scale construction projects.


What's driving unrest and protests in Turkey? 
By Jethro Mullen and Susannah Cullinane, CNN
June 4, 2013 -- Updated 1215 GMT (2015 HKT)
(CNN) -- What started as  peaceful sit-in over plans to demolish a park in central Istanbul has grown to become the biggest protest movement against Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan since he was elected more than 10 years ago.
What prompted the protests?
Gezi Park sits in Istanbul's main commercial district and is the last green space in the city center.
So, it didn't go down well with many residents when authorities announced they want to raze the park and put in its place a replica of 19th Century Ottoman barracks -- containing a shopping mall.
On Friday, a district court ordered a temporary stop to any construction. 
Mayor Kadir Topbas emphasized the park demolition was not related to the shopping mall project, but was a part of a wider renovation project of Taksim Square.
But many of the demonstrators say their anger is no longer directed against the proposed government plan. 
In Istanbul, the crowds have been chanting "Tayyip resign" -- referring to Erdogan -- and "shoulder to shoulder against fascism."
Read more: Turkey protests show no sign of letdown
On Tuesday, the KESK confederation of public sector workers --representing 240,000 members -- called a two-day strike to protest what it called the "facism" of Erdogan's governing party.
Why did the demonstrations turn violent?
At first, the protests involved a handful of angry residents holding sit-ins. 
But the numbers quickly grew. 
Riot police moved in, lobbing tear gas and pepper spray and protesters responded by hurling bottles, blocking bulldozers and setting up barricades. 
Then, outraged by the behavior of security forces, demonstrators began attacking police.
International human rights groups Amnesty International and Greenpeace have denounced what they describe as the excessive use of police force against peaceful protesters.
A spokesman for European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton issued a statement that said Ashton "regrets disproportionate use of force by members of the Turkish police." 
Ashton also called for talks between the two sides.
Erdogan conceded Saturday that Turkish security forces had made excessive use of tear gas against demonstrators.
Read more: War-torn Syria issues travel warning against Turkey
"There have been errors in the actions of the security forces, especially with regard to use of pepper gas. 
Right now that is being investigated, researched," he said.
"There is an error there, sure. When it is used excessively we are against it as well. And in fact there was such excess."
However, on Monday, Erdogan dismissed allegations that security forces used excessive force, and denied that Turkey could be on the cusp of its own "Arab Spring." 
"We are servants of the people, not masters. We did not use violence," he said before leaving for a four-day trip to North Africa.
On Tuesday, Turkey's semi-official news agency Andalou quoted Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arinc as saying the country's security and intelligence forces were working to prevent the escalation of violence.
"They are doing a hard job. When they are executing their jobs, they may sometimes use extraordinary even excessive use of force. But they wait in a passive mode unless something comes from the other side," Arinc said. 
He said security forces had been ordered to only use gas in self-defense.
How widespread are the protests?
Since Friday, there have been protests in 67 of Turkey's 81 provinces, according to Andalou. 
There have been reports of confrontations in the capital, Ankara, as well as the port cities of Izmir and Adana.
The Turkish Medical Association claimed that at least 3,195 people had been injured in clashes Sunday and Monday. 
Only 26 of them were in serious or critical condition, it said.
One protester, Mehmet Ayvalitas, died of his injuries, the association said. 
And the governor of Hatay in southeastern Turkey said that a 22-year-old man, Abdulah Comert, was killed with a firearm by unknown suspects during demonstrations late Monday, Andalou reported.
More than 700 people have been detained since Tuesday last week, and most have been released, it said.
Why do the protesters want Erdogan to step down?
The police crackdown on the park demonstrators set off the wider unrest. 
Now, the scope of the protests shows there is a bigger issue, about freedom of speech and accusations of heavy-handed government, at stake.
Elected to power than a decade ago, Erdogan is the most powerful and popular politician Turkey has seen in generations, but his approach to leadership doesn't sit well with all Turks, said Asli Aydintasbas, a columnist for Milliyet Newspaper.
Read more: Court to hear case at center of Istanbul protests
"We have a prime minister who has done great deeds and he really has run the economy well," she said. 
"But you also have this paternalistic style: 'I know what's good for you. I, as your father, can decide on the park, the bridge, the city and the constitution.' So, I think people are just wanting to have a more inclusive form of democracy in Turkey."
Tuncay, a 28-year-old demonstrator, told CNN on Saturday. 
"The Erdogan government is usually considered as authoritarian. He has a big ego; he has this Napoleon syndrome. He takes himself as a sultan... He needs to stop doing that. He's just a prime minister."
How has Erdogan reacted?
A defiant Erdogan shows no inclination to give in to protesters' demands.
On Monday, Erdogan said: "Those in Turkey who speak of the Turkish Spring are right; the season is, in fact, spring," he said. 
"But there are those trying to turn it into a winter."
He said opponents who had failed to defeat his party in elections were trying to beat it "by other means." 
"The issue of trees in Gezi Park thing is just the trigger," he said.
Fadi Hakura, associate fellow and manager of the Turkey Project at London-based think-tank Chatham House, said demonstrations were not equivalent to the uprisings that led to the toppling of other Arab leaders two years ago.
"Unlike Egypt and other Arab countries, Turkey is a functioning, albeit incomplete, democracy and has been since 1950," he said.
"Erdogan received a resounding mandate of almost half the vote in the last general elections in 2011. He still remains the most popular politician in Turkey, while the opposition is widely seen by many Turks as weak and ineffective."
Hakura said the protests coincided with a "rapidly slowing economy" and "the ultimate determinant of Erdogan's staying power will be the state of the Turkish economy rather than anti-government demonstrations."
Read more: Why Turkey's protests are no Arab Spring
So is Erdogan authoritarian?
In November 2012, Erdogan won leadership of his Justice and Development Party, or AKP, for the third time, reaching the party's term limit.
However, the AKP's internal constitution was amended during the party congress to allow parliamentarians who have already served three terms -- such as Erdogan -- to be re-elected after sitting out an election cycle.
"One of the most important aspects of the convention was the message that the prime minister is not going anywhere," Suat Kiniklioglu, a former AKP parliamentarian and director of the Strategic Communication Center based in Ankara, wrote in an e-mail to CNN at the time.
"Instead he will try to become a president who can maintain his party affiliation, or will try to change the system into a presidential or semi-presidential system," he said.
Has religion played any role in the unrest?
Hakura says the protests partially reflect "the deep ideological polarization between secular, liberal-minded Turks, and the more religious Turks."
The modern Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923 by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who instituted secular laws to replace traditional religious orders.
"Secular Turks complain that the Islamist-rooted government is intolerant of criticism and the diversity of lifestyles," he says and "so far, Erdogan's robust and muscular stance vis-à-vis the demonstrators has reinforced those perceptions."
Erdogan describes his AKP party as a "conservative democratic" party but some fear the AKP's conservative Islamic values are encroaching on Turkey's traditional secularism.
Writing for Hurriyet Daily News, Yusuf Kanli said an "arrogant" Erdogan had taken a series of wrong steps ahead of the protests, including passing legislation that placed additional restrictions on the sale and consumption of alcohol.
Erdogan had referred to "two boozers" who had introduced liberal alcohol laws, Kanli said.
"That was an obvious reference to Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the diehard secular founding father of the republic, and his comrade in arms and second president Ismet Inonu," he wrote.
Culture wars frequently pit Turkey's ruling Muslim elite against more secular segments of Turkish society.
The AKP narrowly avoided being banned from politics in 2008 when it was fined by the country's constitutional court for alleged anti-secular activities. 
The court has also blocked legislation to lift a ban on Islamic headscarves at public universities.
Read more: Turkey's Erdogan hails constitutional referendum win
Last month, there was an outcry in social media and newspaper columns when Turkish Airlines -- which is 49% government-owned -- announced it was banning certain shades of lipstick and nail polish among flight attendants.
A similar uproar had ensued when the company announced it would stop serving alcohol on a number of domestic and international routes.
Do Turks have freedom of speech?
On June 3, the Committee to Protect Journalists quoted news accounts and local journalists as saying the press had "come under fire from both government officials and protesters" during the demonstrations.
It referred to criticism of social media and news outlets by Erdogan, saying "when top government officials make anti-media statements, hostility against journalists is interpreted as allowed, even approved," and urged him to publicly denounce violence against journalists.
In 2012, the organization said there were 49 imprisoned journalists in Turkey, making it one of the world's "worst jailers of the press," alongside Iran and China.
Last month, Emma Sinclair-Webb, from Human Rights Watch, said that one of Turkey's "most fundamental human rights problems is in fact intolerance of free speech."
"Politicians regularly sue journalists for defamation. Editors and publishers are mostly unwilling to permit much criticism of the government for fear of harming their bosses' other business interests," Sinclair-Webb said.
"The European Court of Human Rights has found over and over that Turkey has violated free speech. But prosecutors, courts, and government figures are still applying different standards to Turkey, muzzling views they don't want to hear," she said.
Read more: Turkey silencing the guns -- and critics
Turkey applied to join the European Union in 1987. 
In a 2012 progress report, The European Commission said "important reforms are needed to strengthen human rights structures and the number of criminal proceedings brought against human rights defenders is a matter of concern."
It said an increase in violations of freedom of expression also raised "serious concerns" with "pressure on the press by state officials and the firing of critical journalists" leading to widespread self-censorship.
In a statement on its website, Turkey's Ministry of Foreign Affairs says promotion and protection of human rights are "among the priority policy objectives of Turkey."
"In this regard, Turkey has been going through a comprehensive reform process in recent years with a view to further strengthening democracy, consolidating the rule of law and ensuring respect for fundamental rights and freedoms."
Erdogan's chief adviser, Ibrahim Kalin, said Saturday that the protesters had a right to express their discontent, within limits.
"People are entitled to disagreement with the government; they can exercise their democratic rights, but they can do so within the context of a democratic society," he said.
Is it safe to visit Turkey at the moment?
Britain's Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) has advised British nationals to avoid all demonstrations "following recent demonstrations in Istanbul and other cities in Turkey in which police used tear gas and water cannons," but it has not told its citizens to avoid travel to Istanbul.
The U.S. has also warned its citizens to beware of demonstrations, in Turkey, which is one of Washington's key allies in the Middle East. 
"U.S. citizens traveling or residing in Turkey should be alert to the potential for violence, avoid those areas where disturbances have occurred, and avoid demonstrations and large gatherings."
Australia advised its citizens to "avoid protests and demonstrations throughout Turkey as they may become violent."
Meantime, war-torn Syria has warned its citizens not to visit its neighbor.
''The Foreign and Expatriates Ministry advises the Syrian citizens against traveling to Turkey during this period for fear for their safety, due to the security conditions in some Turkish cities that have deteriorated over the past days and the violence practiced by Erdogan's government against peaceful protesters," it said in a statement Sunday.


A.J. Duffy, still-feisty former teachers union chief, retires
His career in education ends after two years at Phoenix High, working with students who need a second chance. 
He said he could relate.
By Howard Blume, Los Angeles Times
June 8, 2013, 6:19 p.m.
The lineup of must-see videos for the high school class on public speaking was notable: Hitler, Martin Luther King Jr., Mussolini, President Obama — and A.J. Duffy, the former president of the L.A. teachers union and also the instructor.
The former, highly visible union leader returned to the classroom in fall 2011 almost as a last resort — landing in almost invisible Phoenix High School adjacent to Venice High in Mar Vista.
There, Duffy, 69, retired Friday, after two years of working with students who needed a second chance.
But his personality has hardly become retiring.
For example, he calls current union President Warren Fletcher "hugely ineffective," unable to rally the troops to create political pressure.
"He does not know how to delegate and his door is usually closed," Duffy said.
(Fletcher had been a Duffy critic back in the day.)
Duffy also vehemently objects to any linking of teacher evaluations to student test scores — a provision teachers voted to accept this year under pressure from a court order.
As president, Duffy had been an omnipresent, polarizing figure: a vain, cartoonish union boss to critics; a passionate defender and loyal friend to supporters.
His prime directive had been to push for teachers and parents to have real authority at schools, and he made progress to that end. 
But those gains, he said, are under threat from the district's middle-management bureaucracy, which, he said, is prepared to outlast current L.A. schools Supt. John Deasy.
After term limits ended Duffy's six-year run as union president in 2011, he'd hoped for a top management job leading reform efforts under Deasy, but the superintendent had others in mind.
Then, Duffy was set to be chief executive of a unionized charter school, to demonstrate that charters and unions could collaborate. 
But the school fell short of enrollment targets and its board folded the CEO duties into those of the chief academic officer.
So Duffy returned to the classroom for his first extended stint since the mid-1990s, in part because he had bills to pay and because he wasn't ready to walk off the stage, even if that stage was an out-of-control classroom on the second floor of an out-of-the-way campus.
"Everyone was doing what they wanted to do," student Jesse Chavez said of the first day Duffy walked in. 
"I was sitting in the back laughing."
All were struck by Duffy's trademark look: suit and tie, two-tone tan and brown dress shoes.
"He was suited and booted," said Jesse.
"He looked like the Penguin from Batman," Manny Mora offered.
"Don Corleone," thought resource teacher Kate Mitchell, looking at her new colleague. 
Mitchell, an award-winning teacher, later had to tell Duffy off sometimes for interrupting her work or ordering her around.
"What have I gotten myself into?" Duffy wondered.
Most of his job involved supervising independent work for social studies subjects. 
Students attend Phoenix because they fell behind in credits, don't fit in elsewhere or got into trouble.
Mia Carrillo recounted how she derailed in eighth grade, when she got a felony conviction for breaking into her middle school. 
In ninth grade, she said, she became a heavy drug user and stopped going to school.
But things turned around at Phoenix: "People don't judge; they accept you. It's like a big, big family."
Duffy could relate. 
He has said he spent several years as a heroin addict and he didn't progress beyond third-grade reading skills until his mid-20s. 
He would read the same five books over and over — three on world history and two on World War II, carefully working out each word.
Later, as union president, he insisted that his staff critique his speeches and interviews. 
He also listened to tapes and corrected himself.
He settled on public speaking as an elective to offer students, using speeches from his own career to talk about what he had tried to achieve.
In a speech after being elected union chief, for example, he'd said his wife was the only one who always believed he would win and that she was the "first lady of his heart."
"You can get people on your side," Duffy explained. 
"Right away, they see that this guy loves his wife and he's not afraid to put it out there.... As union president, there were things I did that most didn't like; but if they liked me, this was something to fall back on."
He also showed the students video of Mussolini, the Italian dictator: "I wanted them to see the arrogance, how convincing it was."
In their own speeches, students talked about body image, bulimia, their parents' deaths, getting into trouble, admiration for an older brother, a love of reggae music.
Jesse used to get into fights and ditch school, but he's aiming for college now: "Mr. Duffy kind of convinced me I have a brain in my head."
"I saw so much growth in these kids," Duffy said. 
"I would tell the kids regularly: 'If you thought this was about public speaking, I lied to you.' It was really about self-actualization. Where are you going? Where do you want to be? And what skills do you need to get to where you want to be?"
Last week, Duffy pointed around the room, praising students one by one: Manny for overcoming his defiance, Emily Cedeno for opening up, Esperanza Ortega for her poetry.
"Under no circumstances should people think these kids are not as smart as other kids," Duffy said. 
"This was the perfect place for me to end my teaching career because I couldn't fit in, either, and there wasn't a place like this for me."


Private college cuts its old-school ties
A fee-paying institution in Liverpool is the latest to become an academy
One of the country's most prestigious independent schools is to become one of the Government's flagship academies this September, as part of an exodus of schools from the private to the state sector.
Liverpool College, founded in 1843, is one of the 12 founder members of the Headmasters' (now Headmasters' and Headmistresses') Conference, which represents 250 of the country's leading independent schools. 
It is the Government's most significant catch since it started encouraging private schools to switch sector.
The decision will bring to 21 by September the number of independent schools that have joined the state sector, either as academies or one of the Government's new free schools. 
The King's School in Tynemouth will also become an academy this year.
Three more independent schools will become free schools in 2014, including Queen Elizabeth's Grammar School in Blackburn, also an HMC school, and Chetwynde in Barrow-in-Furness, Cumbria.
The former Labour schools minister Lord Adonis, who acted as a catalyst for Liverpool College's conversion, said: "I expect dozens more to follow before long."
The school faced a dilemma if it wanted to expand and bring its pupil numbers back up to when it had 1,100 on roll. 
The school currently has 735 four- to 18-year-olds.
Its brochure outlining the decision for the switch says: "Demand for the type of education provided by Liverpool College is high but the number of Liverpool parents who can afford the fees [of £10,000 a year] is relatively low. 
Research has shown that the number of families able to afford the fees at Liverpool College is shrinking and is likely to continue to shrink in the future – thereby decreasing the demand for places at the college while the demand and need for high-quality education will continue."
Hans van Mourik Broekman, the school's principal, said the switch would help the school to retain its founders' commitment to provide a good standard of education for the people of Liverpool. 
"It was a question of what was the right course to follow," he said. 
"The vision of the founders was that it would really serve the people of Liverpool. Since the disappearance of the assisted places scheme, it has become increasingly difficult for the people we seek to serve to pay these fees."
The school is planning to increase its intake in the first year of the secondary school from 75 to 100 pupils, and from 40 to 50 in the primary. 
Over a five-year period, numbers will rise to 1,100.
It will retain a boarding element, with pupils receiving their day-to-day education free but paying for the boarding accommodation. 
There will also be a separate Liverpool College International for 10 overseas sixth-form students – the income from which will be ploughed into the academy.
It will operate a banding system for admissions – taking equal numbers of pupils from different ability ranges – and also operate a lottery system for some of the places to prevent better-off parents from pushing up house prices by moving into the catchment area.
Mr Broekman said: "Two-thirds of our parents are strongly in favour and 22-23 per cent were agnostic. Ten per cent of parents would rather we had not done this. Only two parents have withdrawn their children."
Lord Adonis predicted that within a couple of decades, as fee-paying schools become virtually extinct, people might look back and wonder why Britain ever had such a divisive system of education.
A spokeswoman for the Department for Education added: "We welcome Liverpool College's decision to join the state sector and the high-quality provision it will bring to pupils in the area."



Nelson Mandela: world holds its breath as he is admitted to hospital again
The disclosure that Nelson Mandela has been admitted to hospital again has caused South Africa, as well as the world, to hold its breath, write David Blair and Aislinn Laing. 
By David Blair, Aislinn Laing in Johannesburg
7:10PM BST 08 Jun 2013
He gave up the presidency last century, officially retired more than a decade ago and has said nothing in public since a tragic announcement in 2005 that his son had died of Aids.
Nelson Mandela, living in seclusion at the age of 94 behind whitewashed walls in Johannesburg, wields no political power or behind-the-scenes influence.
Yet the disclosure that he has been admitted to hospital for the fourth time in just over six months caused millions of his compatriots to catch their breath.
It was "serious this time", said Mac Maharaj, President Jacob Zuma's spokesman. 
"Every day that he gets older, it gets more serious."
A persistent lung infection had recurred, causing Mr Mandela to be taken from his home in Johannesburg to an undisclosed hospital in Pretoria in the early hours of Saturday morning. 
"At 1.30am today the doctors came to the conclusion that his condition had deteriorated enough that it warranted hospital treatment," Mr Maharaj told The Sunday Telegraph.
He said that Mr Mandela, who endured 27 years in prison for his ultimately victorious battle against apartheid, was a "fighter" but that he had been weakened by successive illnesses. 
"We need to hold our thoughts and we need to keep him in our minds," he added.
An official statement described Mr Mandela's condition as "serious but stable", adding that he was "receiving expert medical care" and that doctors were doing "everything possible to make him better and comfortable".
The former president was said to be breathing unaided, which was described as "a positive sign". 
However, news of Mr Mandela's condition forced Graca Machel, his wife, to cancel an appearance yesterday at a hunger summit in London. 
She had been due to deliver an address on nutrition, but instead flew back to South Africa to be at her husband's bedside, along with Maki Mandela, his daughter, and other members of his large family.
In March, the last time that Mr Mandela was admitted to hospital, his eldest grandson, Mandla, said that his family were under no illusions about his state of health.
"We have been blessed as a family to have my grandfather all these years with us," he said. 
"We have cherished every moment and continue to do so."
But while South Africans may have had time to prepare themselves for his passing, and although the sentiment that his life should not be prolonged unnecessarily is heard with increasing frequency, there is a keen sense of trepidation about what awaits the "Rainbow Nation" without its founding father.
The Nobel peace laureate is revered around the world as a symbol of peace and forgiveness after leading South Africa into multi-race democracy as its first black president, and his readmission to hospital – and the acknowledgement that his condition is serious – sparked intense concern around the world. 
South Africa is a young country, and almost 20 years have passed since Mr Mandela's victory in the first multi-racial elections in 1994 provided a moment of triumph. 
The half of South Africans who are under the age of 25 can have no real memory of their nation's intoxicating rebirth.
Nor can they know of the terrible past he was seeking to bury when he declared in his inaugural speech as president: "Never, never and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one by another".
But the young will share the anxiety and sorrow of their elders today. 
South Africans are allergic to outsiders writing about Mr Mandela's life and legacy whenever he falls into poor health. 
They are particularly sensitive if coverage of their former leader appears to assume he is already dead.
Moreover, they resent any suggestion that the fate of their country of 50 million people depends on the heartbeat of one man. 
Mr Mandela himself would undoubtedly make this point if he were able to do so.
Yet, deep down, his compatriots know that Mr Mandela's passing will not simply be the cause of heartfelt grief. 
South Africa the day after Mandela will be a different country. 
Even in secluded retirement, Mr Mandela is part of the fabric of the nation's political settlement. 
He serves as a silent guarantor of the democratic, harmonious and non-racial South Africa that he sought to bring into being.
For as long as he is around, South Africans believe their present leaders will be slightly more devoted to the principles of the nation's rebirth – and slightly less likely to step out of line. 
He remains the father of the new country forged by the idealism of a democratic constitution.
In that sense, Mr Mandela remains South Africa's informal and unseen head of state. 
For as long as he lives, his compatriots have a little more faith in their country. 
The day after Mandela, that belief will have been shaken.
Mamoshomo Tswai, a street trader, told the BBC: "As long as Tata [father] is still alive, then poor people like me, people who are down down, single mothers like me, we still have hope.
"South Africa is nothing without him."
There is much about the state of South Africa to demoralise its people. 
Mr Zuma's government lacks direction or purpose. 
A rising tide of corruption is penetrating all institutions of the state.
The economy has returned to stagnation, with the vital mining sector bedevilled by strikes, the rand sliding against all other currencies and growth slipping below 3 per cent. 
In a country where mass unemployment is the biggest social problem and the main cause of violent crime, any prolonged downturn would threaten order and safety.
By its own estimate, the government believes that growth needs to be above 5 per cent for South Africa to cut poverty and joblessness.
The situation betrays all Mr Zuma's faults as a leader. 
Lacking any real grasp of policy, he strives for consensus – and often fails to achieve it.
In theory, the government is committed to the "National Development Plan", a sweeping programme of economic reform designed to make it easier for companies to hire workers. 
In reality, the trade-union movement and the Left wing of the ruling African National Congress (ANC) are bitterly opposed – and Mr Zuma is unable or unwilling to break the deadlock.
Deprived of Mr Mandela's unifying authority, the ANC is torn by division and acrimony. 
Well-connected cronies of the ruling party become richer, even as a stagnating economy fails to deliver jobs or prosperity to the millions living in absolute poverty.
Mr Mandela has been unable to make any impact on these problems for many years. 
They demonstrate only that South Africa needs all the light and optimism which, somehow, he still casts.
In Mr Mandela's home village of Qunu, in the rural Eastern Cape, villagers were briefed by Mandla on the latest developments.
The former president turns 95 on July 18, and had been expecting a visit from President Barack Obama, who is due in South Africa at the end of this month.
A friend who saw Mr Mandela this week told The Sunday Telegraph that he had seemed better of late. 
"Sometimes he is too tired to even talk but this week he was talking and seemed pretty fine," the friend said. 
"He has his ups and downs but he really seemed OK."
However, his admission to hospital means that South Africa's former president has now been admitted to hospital for treatment four times in just over six months.
In December, he spent nearly three weeks – including Christmas Day – in hospital with a lung infection, and to undergo non-invasive surgery to remove gallstones.
Then in March, Mr Mandela spent 10 days in hospital with the same lung condition, having similarly been taken from his home by ambulance in the early hours. 
On that occasion, the former president underwent a procedure to drain fluid from his lungs, apparently caused by pneumonia.
He spent another night in hospital later that month for what was described as a scheduled medical test.
In April, the ANC was widely condemned when it released footage of a visit by its senior members, including President Zuma, to Mr Mandela at his home in Houghton, Johannesburg. 
Despite Mr Zuma's assurances that Mr Mandela was well, his dazed and weak appearance in the footage shocked South Africans. 
Jackson Mthembu, a spokesman for the ANC, said the party and its supporters were praying for the former president, known to millions by his clan name, Madiba.
"We call upon South Africans and the peoples of the globe to do the same for our beloved statesman and icon, Madiba," he said. 
"We send to him our well wishes for a speedy recovery."
David Cameron added his best wishes, saying: "My thoughts are with Nelson Mandela, who is in hospital in South Africa."
Mr Mandela's lungs were weakened by the tuberculosis he contracted while in prison. 
He is in remission from prostate cancer and has additional problems, from a hernia and gallstones.
Patrick Craven, spokesman for the Congress of South African Trade Unions, added: "Our 2.2 million members, thousands of working people, millions of South Africans and countless more freedom-loving people around the world are thinking of you today.
"Madiba's contribution to the struggle for freedom and democracy has been second to none." 


Nelson Mandela hospitalized in serious condition with lung infection
The venerated former South African president fell ill several days ago, but his condition deteriorated overnight. 
By Robyn Dixon, Los Angeles Times
June 8, 2013, 3:50 p.m.
JOHANNESBURG — Former South African President Nelson Mandela has been hospitalized in serious condition with a lung infection, according to government officials here, the latest in a worrisome series of medical ailments plaguing the nation's venerated first post-apartheid black leader.
South African presidential spokesman Mac Maharaj said in a statement that Mandela, 94, fell ill several days ago, but his condition deteriorated overnight and he was transferred to Pretoria early Saturday.
"He remains in a serious but stable condition. The former president is receiving expert medical care and doctors are doing everything possible to make him better and comfortable," Maharaj said.
TIMELINE: The life of Nelson Mandela
On Saturday evening, the president's office said it would not release minute-by-minute reports on Mandela's condition and would announce an update only in the event of a major change in his condition. 
On previous occasions, the South African government has downplayed the seriousness of Mandela's illnesses.
The government's frank admission that Mandela was in serious condition underscored the fears over the elderly statesman's increasing frailty.
Comments from officials also suggested that Mandela's current illness may be graver than ones in the past. 
African National Congress spokesman, Jackson Mthembu, told Sky News that the party was "prepared for the worst." 
He said it was "time for the nation to hold hands and pray."
Maharaj said President Jacob Zuma wished Mandela a speedy recovery and called on people to respect the Mandela family's privacy. 
He said South Africans would like Mandela to be with them forever.
"But we also know we are all human beings — our life is transient — and therefore, with our prayers, with our thoughts, I know we will help him to be strong."
Mandela's wife, Graca Machel, canceled an appearance in London, where she was to address a summit on hunger, and was at Mandela's bedside.
Maharaj told eNCA television that the former president, known affectionately in South Africa by his clan name, Madiba, was breathing without a respirator and that the condition was "treatable on its own."
"What I am told is that he is breathing on his own and I think that is a positive sign. Madiba is a fighter and at his age, as long as he is fighting, he will be fine," Maharaj said.
Mandela was hospitalized for nearly three weeks in December with a lung infection and also underwent gallstone surgery. 
When he was again admitted in April with a lung infection, South Africans held meetings to pray for his recovery, and people across the globe sent goodwill messages.
It is Mandela's fifth visit to a hospital in two years, each one sparking deep anxiety for South Africans. 
He has struggled with repeated lung infections after a serious bout of tuberculosis during his 27-year imprisonment during apartheid.
In March, Zuma made comments to the BBC that seemed to be an effort to try to prepare South Africa for the inevitable eventual demise of an elderly man often referred to here as an "icon."
"In Zulu, when someone passes away who is very old, people say he or she has gone home. I think those are some of the things we should be thinking about," Zuma said in the interview.
A few weeks after Mandela's release from the hospital in April, South African television aired footage of Zuma and other African National Congress officials meeting Mandela at his home, with Zuma describing him at the time as doing fine and "up and about." 
The news clip showed Mandela looking gray and unresponsive, shocking many South Africans because it demonstrated how poor his health had become. 
Some accused the party of invading his privacy or exploiting a frail old man for political purposes.
The ANC defended the release of the April video footage, saying it would never be used for purposes of political opportunism "or to mask what we believe is the fear of South Africans to accept that President Mandela is mortal and aged."
Dozens of news crews gathered outside Mandela's home in suburban Houghton, north of Johannesburg, on Saturday, while others waited outside the hospital in Pretoria.
Mandela served one term as president and stepped down in 1999 to concentrate on charity work helping children, particularly those orphaned through AIDS. 
He has not been active in public life for almost a decade. 
But he remains an enormously important symbol of hope and unity in South Africa, a country with lingering racial tensions, widespread poverty and massive social problems.


South Africans pray for hospitalized Mandela
By Shafiek Tassiem
SOWETO, South Africa | Sun Jun 9, 2013 10:42am EDT
(Reuters) - South Africans prayed for Nelson Mandela's recovery on Sunday as the 94-year-old former president spent a second day in hospital with a recurring lung infection.
Mandela, who became a global symbol of triumph over adversity and South Africa's first black leader in 1994 after the defeat of apartheid, was hospitalized early on Saturday after his already frail health worsened.
It is his fourth hospital stay since December and the government said on Saturday his condition was "serious". 
During previous hospital visits it had highlighted his "good spirits".
His health is a cause for concern to the millions of South Africans who revere Mandela for his decades of struggle against white-minority rule and steering the continent's biggest economy to all-race elections.
Hundreds gathered to pray for him at Sunday Mass at the Regina Mundi Catholic church in the sprawling Johannesburg township of Soweto.
"We wish him speedy recovery, he must get well," Soweto resident Mlugisi Sekhosana said. 
"We know what he did for us in South Africa. All the nation, black and white, we wish him well."
The government had yet to give an update on his condition early on Sunday.
The Sunday Times newspaper took a somber tone, with the headline "It's time to let him go", quoting a longtime friend of Mandela's, Andrew Mlangeni.
"The family must release him so that God may have his own way. They must release him spiritually and put their faith in the hands of God," the newspaper quoted Mlangeni as saying.
"Once the family releases him, the people of South Africa will follow."


Obama, Chinese president wrap up a sometimes contentious summit
President Obama and Xi Jinping discuss cyber security, climate change and North Korea during the two-day summit in California.
By Christi Parsons and Paul Richter, Los Angeles Times
June 8, 2013, 6:11 p.m.
RANCHO MIRAGE, Calif. — President Obama and his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, wrapped up a summit at this sweltering California desert resort Saturday after nearly eight hours of talks over two days and a candle-lit dinner aimed at shaping what both leaders called a "new model" of future relations.
The meetings grew contentious Saturday morning when Obama pushed Xi to do more to curb Chinese cyber attacks on U.S. businesses and infrastructure. 
Obama argued the alleged hacking was "inconsistent with the kind of relationship we want to have with China," according to Tom Donilon, the president's national security advisor.
Donilon said Obama detailed cases of massive digital thefts at U.S. companies by entities in China, and said if they are not addressed, it would become a "very difficult problem in the economic relationship" between the two countries.
Cyber theft, Donilon told reporters, "really now is at the center of the relationship. It is not an adjunct issue."
The Obama administration has accused China of stealing billions of dollars of technical, financial and other data and intellectual property through cyber attacks. 
China denies the charge, insisting it is the victim, not the instigator, of digital looting.
On other issues, the two sides agreed for the first time to work together to "phase down the production and consumption" of hydrofluorocarbons, or HFCs, which are potent greenhouse gases linked to climate change. 
The gases are in refrigerators, air conditioners and industrial applications.
Donilon said the two leaders also found "quite a bit of alignment" on North Korea, and a possible path for increased cooperation given the threat to regional and U.S. security. 
Both agreed that North Korea should give up its nuclear weapons.
The presidents discussed North Korea over their Friday night dinner of lobster tamales, porterhouse steak and cherry pie prepared by celebrity chef Bobby Flay.
The summit at the Sunnylands estate was notable for its dress code: No one wore neckties, a testament to the oven-like heat and carefully scripted informality of the presidents' first meeting since Xi assumed office in March.
Yang Jiechi, China's state counselor and former foreign minister, told reporters that the importance of the summit was to lay the groundwork for a new relationship, not in any specific accords.
He said cyber security "should not become the root cause of mutual suspicion and friction. Rather, it should be a new bright spot in our cooperation."
Yang said the leaders "blazed a new trail" away from disputes of the last 18 months over regional security and computer hacking. 
He called the session a "strategic, constructive and historic meeting."
His comments reflect Beijing's desire to demonstrate Xi's skills as a firm steward of China's interests. 
Xi's aides viewed the summit as a way to show China and the United States as equals, a theme the Chinese leader has emphasized in public comments.
Undergirding the shift is a worrisome challenge: Will China's rising ambitions and growing military and economic clout inevitably lead to a clash with the world's richest and most powerful nation.
The jockeying already has begun.
The Obama administration has started to "pivot" military forces and diplomatic focus to China's periphery in the western Pacific. 
For his part, Xi arrived here after doling out largesse in high-profile visits to America's backyard, Mexico and the Caribbean.
"What will happen when a rising power and a great power encounter one another?" asked an editorial in Saturday's Global Times, a newspaper tied to the Chinese Communist Party. 
"The U.S. is trying its best to maintain its status quo, in order to retain its hegemony. 
China … is eager to become a world power under the rules approved by Western countries."
Obama gave a one-word summary of the summit Saturday, his only public comment of the day. 
"Terrific," he replied when a reporter asked how the meetings had gone, as he and Xi strolled for 50 minutes by a pond and then sat together on a redwood bench that Obama presented to his guest.
But in more detailed comments Friday night, both leaders sought to downplay the possibility of tension, highlighting instead shared interests and opportunities for cooperation. 
They pledged to expand official and informal exchanges on military affairs, economics and trade, cyber security, the environment and other issues.
"China and the United States must find a new path, one that is different from the inevitable confrontation and conflict between the major countries of the past," Xi said. 
If the two nations work together, he added, "we can be an anchor for world stability and the propeller of world peace."
Obama said he firmly believes "it is very much in the interest of the United States for China to continue its peaceful rise" and to "work with us as equal partners in dealing with many of the global challenges that no single nation can address by itself."
In response to a question, Obama said both leaders agreed on the need for enhanced cyber security.
"These are uncharted waters, and you don't have the kind of protocols that have governed military and arms issues, where nations have a lot of experience in trying to negotiate what's acceptable and what's not," he said.
Xi said recent media reports "might give people the sense or feeling that cyber security as a threat mainly comes from China" or that the issue is the chief irritant in relations with Washington. 
He suggested those reports were wrong.
Chinese state television lavished considerable attention on the summit, showing Xi animatedly chatting with Obama. 
Noticeably absent from the coverage was Xi's wife, Peng Liyuan, perhaps to avoid noting that First Lady Michelle Obama did not attend. 
The two presidents drank tea for half an hour with Peng on Saturday before the Chinese delegation departed.
Some China watchers and historians say they were struck by how Xi seemed to move comfortably like a Western leader, not only in loosening his collar but also in how he seemed to stroll at ease with Obama as the two leaders engaged with each other.
For all the optics, however, Jeff Wasserstrom, a China specialist at UC Irvine remained skeptical that Xi will take China down a reformist path as some have suggested.
"We shouldn't let this blind us to how much continuity there seems to be between Xi and his predecessors when it comes to some basic policies," he said. 
And "despite his distinctive personal style, he remains more the first among equals in a collective leadership than someone who can make bold moves largely on his own initiative."
Nonetheless, analysts said the meeting probably eased tensions on several fronts even if it didn't solve long-standing points of contention.
"We've been coming out of a difficult period for the last 18 months of distrust, and what [Xi is] trying to convey is that we're heading in the wrong direction," said Christopher Johnson, a senior fellow and China specialist at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. 
"He's saying, 'Here's the opportunity to hit the reset button and put this relationship on a more strategic plane.'"
U.S. officials praised the countries' agreement to work together on climate change.
It "is a tremendous accomplishment for [Obama] and his diplomatic team, and a big step forward on climate," said Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D-Beverly Hills), a member of the House Committee on Energy and Commerce. 
"The United States and China working together to tackle climate change is a major breakthrough. A global phase-down of HFCs would eliminate more heat-trapping gases by 2050 than the United States emits in an entire decade."
HFCs are synthetic chemicals developed as substitutes for compounds that deplete the stratospheric ozone layer. 
But HFCs are also seen as contributing to climate change.
U.S. negotiators have pushed China to agree to reduce the gases in the past, but it has resisted because HFCs have come into wide use in the developing world for air conditioning, refrigeration and some foam products.


Obama, Xi talk cyber security and North Korea at summit
By Matt Spetalnick, Steve Holland and John Ruwitch
RANCHO MIRAGE, California | Sat Jun 8, 2013 6:53pm EDT
(Reuters) - President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping agreed on Saturday that North Korea must give up its nuclear weapons, during a two-day summit where Obama directly aired U.S. concerns about Chinese cyber theft to his counterpart.
Obama and Xi had wide-ranging talks, including a 50-minute chat outdoors, to conclude a get-to-know-you visit that included an extensive discussion of how to rein in North Korea, whose belligerent rhetoric in recent months has rattled the Asia-Pacific as well as the United States.
"They agreed that North Korea has to denuclearize, that neither country will accept North Korea as a nuclear-armed state and that we would work together to deepen cooperation and dialogue to achieve denuclearization," White House national security adviser Tom Donilon told reporters.
Chinese State Councillor Yang Jiechi told a separate news conference that Xi had told Obama that China and the United States were "the same in their positions and objectives" on the North Korean nuclear issue. 
China is Pyongyang's ally but has become increasingly concerned at North Korean threats of war against South Korea.
In talks that may set the stage for U.S.-Chinese relations for years to come, the pair spent about eight hours together over Friday and Saturday at a sprawling retreat in the sun-baked desert near Palm Springs, California.
Their visit included a one-on-one session during a walk outside in the desert heat, an effort to inject some warmth into often chilly relations.
Donilon said Obama raised directly with Xi the U.S. allegations that Chinese cyber attacks have been aimed at stealing U.S. industrial secrets.
Obama described to Xi the exact kinds of problems the United States was concerned about regarding cyber thievery and said that if they were not addressed, it would become a "very difficult problem in the economic relationship," said Donilon.
Yang, briefing Chinese reporters, said Beijing wanted cooperation rather than friction with the United States over cybersecurity.
"Cybersecurity should not become the root cause of mutual suspicion and friction, rather it should be a new bright spot in our cooperation," Yang said.


Xi-Obama summit: US and China agree North Korea must give up nuclear weapons
US President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping have agreed that North Korea must give up its nuclear weapons, during a two-day summit where Mr Obama directly aired US concerns about Chinese cyber theft to his counterpart.
By Reuters
12:33AM BST 09 Jun 2013
The pair held wide-ranging talks to conclude a get-to-know-you visit that included an extensive discussion of how to rein in North Korea, whose belligerent rhetoric in recent months has rattled the Asia-Pacific as well as the United States.
"They agreed that North Korea has to denuclearize, that neither country will accept North Korea as a nuclear-armed state and that we would work together to deepen cooperation and dialogue to achieve denuclearization," White House national security adviser Tom Donilon told reporters.
Chinese State Councillor Yang Jiechi told a separate news conference that Mr Xi had told Mr Obama that China and the United States were "the same in their positions and objectives" on the North Korean nuclear issue. 
China is Pyongyang's ally but has become increasingly concerned at North Korean threats of war against South Korea.
In talks that may set the stage for US-Sino relations for years to come, the pair spent about eight hours together over Friday and Saturday at a sprawling retreat in the sun-baked desert near Palm Springs, California.
Their visit included a one-on-one session during a walk outside in the desert heat, an effort to inject some warmth into often chilly relations. 


Twenty-five reported dead in clashes in Libyan Benghazi
By Feras Bosalum
BENGHAZI, Libya | Sat Jun 8, 2013 5:50pm EDT
(Reuters) - At least 25 people were killed and 70 wounded in clashes in the eastern Libyan city of Benghazi on Saturday between protesters, eventually backed by government forces, and a militia operating with Defence Ministry approval, a doctor said.
Residents said dozens of protesters, some armed, had massed outside the headquarters of the Libya Shield brigade demanding the disbanding of militias who have yet to lay down their weapons nearly two years after the overthrow of long-time dictator Muammar Gaddafi.
After several hours of fighting, military special forces were brought in to restore order and seized the compound, losing five men in the process, a military source said.
A doctor at central Benghazi's al-Jalaa hospital said he had counted 25 dead in all and between 70 and 80 wounded.
Resentment against Libya's myriad militias has been growing in recent months, especially after militiamen laid siege to ministries in Tripoli last month to force their will on the national assembly.
But the central government, whose own forces are too weak to maintain security in a country awash with weapons, has found itself having to co-opt or license some of the most powerful militias to maintain even a semblance of order, while shutting down some others.
The Libya Shield brigade is made up of former rebel fighters who say they are aligned with the Defence Ministry.
"A group of protesters started protesting against the presence of militias. They were calling for the disbanding of groups to rebuild the army," said a Benghazi resident who declined to be named.
"As I was leaving, I saw protesters throwing stones and the other side fired back."
A Reuters reporter at the scene heard shooting and counted at least a dozen wounded people being carried to ambulances.
Ahmed Belashahr, a local activist, said: "People protested because they believe militias go against Libya's stability, which can only be achieved through a proper army and police."
Members of the Libya Shield brigade were not immediately reachable for comment.
Last September, shortly after an attack on the U.S. mission in Benghazi in which the U.S. ambassador and three other Americans were killed, the city saw a huge outpouring of public anger at the militias.
(Additional reporting by Ghaith Shennib in Tripoli; Writing by Marie-Louise Gumuchian; Editing by Kevin Liffey)


North and South Korea hold first talks for two years
North and South Korean officials have sat down for their first talks in years, confronting decades of mutual distrust in a search for some positive end to months of soaring military tensions. 
By AFP
2:40AM BST 09 Jun 2013
The working-level discussions, which began at around 10:00am (0100 GMT) in the border truce village of Panmunjom, were intended to pave the way for ministerial-level talks in Seoul on Wednesday.
The agenda focused on restoring suspended commercial links, including the Kaesong joint industrial complex that the North effectively shut down in April as tensions between the historic rivals peaked.
The talks came about after an unexpected reversal on Thursday from North Korea, which suddenly dropped its default tone of high-decibel belligerence and proposed opening a dialogue.
South Korea responded swiftly with its offer of a ministerial meeting in Seoul, the North countered with a request for lower-level talks first and - after some relatively benign to-and-fro about the best venue - Sunday's meet in Panmunjom was agreed.
In a further signal of intent, North Korea on Friday restored its official hotline with the South, which it had severed in March. 
The two Koreas last held working talks in February 2011, and they have not met at the ministerial level since 2007.
The move towards dialogue has been broadly welcomed - given the threats of nuclear war that were being flung around in April and May - but there is sizeable scepticism in the South and elsewhere about Pyongyang's intentions.
"The North Korean offer has all of the hallmarks of Pyongyang's diplomacy," said Stephan Haggard, a North Korea expert at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.
"Pyongyang is 'sincerely' and 'magnanimously' inviting the South to fix, and pay for, problems of the North's own creation," Haggard said.
It was the North's decision to withdraw its 53,000 workers in early April that closed Kaesong which, until then, had proved remarkably resilient to the regular upheavals in inter-Korean relations.
The North also wants to discuss resuming tours by South Koreans to its Mount Kumgang resort. 
These were suspended after a North Korean soldier shot dead a South Korean tourist there in July 2008.
Kaesong and Mount Kumgang were both significant sources of scarce foreign currency for North Korea, which is squeezed by UN sanctions imposed over its nuclear weapons programme.
There are also suggestions that Pyongyang was playing to a specific audience by proposing talks just before US President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping sat down for their crucial summit in California.
"The offer was transparently timed to coincide with the Obama-Xi summit, suggesting - probably wrongly - that the North is willing to do something substantive to unfreeze relations on the peninsula," said Haggard.
China, the North's sole major ally and economic benefactor, has been under US pressure to restrain its neighbour and has pushed Pyongyang to drop its destabilising strategy of confrontation.
On Saturday, Obama and Xi closely consulted on North Korea's recent nuclear brinkmanship, and agreed to work together on the "denuclearisation" of the Korean peninsula, US National Security Advisor Tom Donilon said.
The two men achieved "quite a bit of alignment" on the issue, Donilon said, praising recent steps taken by Beijing to express disapproval of its nominal ally.
Analysts say South Korea will approach talks with Pyongyang with a caution born of long experience.
President Park Geun-Hye, who took office in February with a promise of greater engagement with Pyongyang, has welcomed the initiative.
But she remains adamant that any substantive dialogue on wider issues can only take place if the North shows some tangible commitment to abandoning its nuclear weapons programme.
North Korea has been equally emphatic in declaring its nuclear deterrent is not up for negotiation.
It was the North's nuclear test in February - and subsequent UN sanctions - that triggered the recent crisis that saw Pyongyang threaten both the South and the United States with pre-emptive nuclear strikes. 


South Korea: North agrees to meet for talks
By the CNN Staff
June 8, 2013 -- Updated 0248 GMT (1048 HKT)
Seoul, South Korea (CNN) -- South Korea said Saturday that North Korea has agreed to meet Sunday for talks that will focus on reopening their shared industrial complex and other issues.
The talks are another sign of improvement in the severely strained relations between the two sides.
Pyongyang on Friday reconnected a hotline between the two sides that it had severed amid recent tensions.
North Korea set off months of tensions with a long-range rocket launch in December followed by an underground nuclear test in February.


US to launch leak inquiry into PRISM reports
America's National Security Agency has formally requested a criminal probe into the leak of highly classified information about its secret surveillance programmes. 
By Reuters
9:40AM BST 09 Jun 2013
A "crimes report has been filed," said Shawn Turner, a spokesman for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.
The announcement came as US officials acknowledged for the first time that data harvesting programme, Prism existed. 
James Clapper, the director of National Intelligence, said the initiative had been mischaracterised by the media. 
The project is legal, not aimed at US citizens and has thwarted threats against the country, he said.
"Over the last week we have seen reckless disclosures of intelligence community measures used to keep Americans safe," Mr Clapper said in a statement.
He said the surveillance activities reported in the Washington Post and the Guardian newspaper were lawful and conducted under authorities approved by Congress. 
"Significant misimpressions" have resulted from recent articles, he said.
His statement came hours before the National Security Agency requested a criminal probe into the leak of highly classified information about secret surveillance programs. 
It was not known how broad a leaks investigation was requested by the super-secret NSA, but Shawn Turner, a spokesman for Mr Clapper's office, said a "crimes report has been filed."
The report goes to the Justice Department, which has established procedures for determining whether an investigation is warranted. 
Prosecutors do not accept all requests, but they have brought a series of high-profile leak investigations under President Barack Obama. 
US officials said the NSA leaks were so astonishing they expected the Justice Department to take the case.
Mr Clapper's comments were the latest development in an escalating battle over government spying and civil liberties, involving the Obama administration and news organizations that have published details of US data mining efforts.
A fact sheet accompanying the statement discussed in general terms what had been until Thursday an unknown and highly classified program. 
It made a rare public acknowledgement that US spy agencies obtained data from US telecommunications providers, but defended the practice as legal and regulated by courts.
"The United States Government does not unilaterally obtain information from the servers of US electronic communication service providers. 
All such information is obtained with FISA Court approval and with the knowledge of the provider," the fact sheet said, referring to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act Court.
Prism, characterised in news reports as a top-secret National Security Agency program for extracting data from the computers of internet companies, in reality is an "internal government computer system" used to "facilitate" the government's handling of information it collects from service providers, according to the factsheet.
The reports this week said the surveillance program involving internet firms and established under Republican President George W. Bush in 2007, had seen "exponential growth" under President Barack Obama, a Democrat. 
It said the NSA increasingly relied on Prism as a source of raw material for daily intelligence reports to the president.
The news reports included PowerPoint slides showing that major Internet companies such as Yahoo, Google , Facebook and a half-dozen others were involved in the program.
Alan Rusbridger, editor-in-chief of the Guardian, had no comment on Mr Clapper's statement. 
Washington Post spokeswoman Kris Coratti said the company had no comment. 


Education think-tank demands the return of polytechnics 
The return of polytechnics will be demanded on Monday in a report on the future of higher education.
The Higher Education Commission – a think-tank which includes four vice-chancellors – argues that their return is necessary to ensure excellence in a range of vocational studies is rewarded.
Polytechnic status was abolished by John Major’s Conservative government in 1992 when all higher education institutions were given the green light to become universities. 
This is believed to have prompted universities to promote academic education at the expense of vocational studies.
“Polytechnic status would carve out a distinctive place in our tertiary education system for institutions that focus on providing higher-level vocational qualifications,” said Nigel Thrift, vice-chancellor of Warwick University, who chaired the commission.
“Polytechnic status would send out wider signals about the importance of vocational learning. It would signal that the university title and the university route are not the only form of high status in our system.”


Inglewood schools' slide steepens despite state takeover
Inglewood Unified's finances worsen despite a state takeover and an infusion of cash; there is even talk of dissolution.
By Stephen Ceasar, Los Angeles Times
June 9, 2013, 5:31 p.m.
Many in Inglewood thought the city's struggling school district had been handed a lifeline last year when the state Department of Education took the reins, hiring new leaders and infusing the school system with $55 million in emergency loans to get it back on track.
But in the nine months since the state takeover, the district's slide has gotten worse.
Inglewood Unified has depleted its reserves, burned through nearly half of the emergency funds in one year and is operating at a $17.7-million deficit that calls for deep cuts. 
Teachers, parents and students say they are angry at the prospect of suffering the brunt of consequences of inept management while deserving none of the blame.
Many in the community now view the state administrators as intruders rather than saviors and question their qualifications. 
State officials contend that the anger is misplaced.
Budget woes are exacerbated by students fleeing the district for nearby charter schools that have been wooing them — and the funding that comes with them.
The district, meanwhile, won't get more emergency money. 
Without scaling back, officials say, the school system could be dissolved.
For the controversy and anger it has incited, the state takeover of the district mirrors others in California. 
But the way it has unfolded does not: Rarely is the possibility of dissolution discussed so publicly, nor has there been such a dense population of charter schools nearby to pull students from a faltering district.
With state funding tied to student enrollment, steep drops can both contribute to the financial collapse of districts and complicate their recovery, said Randy Ward, the San Diego County superintendent of schools, who served as the state-appointed administrator of the Oakland and Compton school districts during their respective takeovers.
In Oakland, the district was losing more than 2,000 students a year before the takeover in 2003. 
Years of overestimating enrollment — and accordingly the expected revenue — damaged district finances, Ward said. 
And as plunging enrollment continues during a recovery, it creates even more difficulties as districts try to climb out.
"As soon as you filled the hole with cuts, you would lose the revenue and a new hole would be created," Ward said. 
"You have the perfect negative storm in terms of revenue and expenditures."
Similar miscalculations caused some of the budget problems in Inglewood, officials say.
When the state moved into the debt-saddled school system, Kent Taylor, an alumnus, was appointed as the state monitor — essentially the superintendent in charge of all operations.
But Taylor resigned within two months, after the Department of Education's discovery that he had made a tentative agreement with the teachers union. 
State officials say he had no authority to enter into such an agreement.
His deputy, La Tanya Kirk-Carter, took over, to the chagrin of much of the community. 
She has been met with anger and distrust. 
Many in the community, among them teachers, parents and unions, contend that Kirk-Carter is not qualified to make the changes necessary.
Kirk-Carter presided over a raucous community meeting last month in which she, along with other state officials, were grilled by teachers, parents and students. 
The crowd shouted and yelled at them.
"It was without a doubt the worst day of my career," she said.
The anger, though understandable, is completely misplaced, Kirk-Carter said. 
"I didn't break this district," she said in a recent interview. 
"It was broken when I got here, and we discovered that it is even more broken than we thought."
Kirk-Carter says she never wanted the position and was not brought in to be the face of the takeover in public, but rather to work behind the scenes to sort out the finances. 
"I'm the nuts-and-bolts girl," she said, "I was hired to fix the district." 
Kirk-Carter plans on closing the $17.7-million hole by moving one high school to a larger site to accommodate more students, converting a K-8 school into a district-run charter to allow students from the entire district to attend ,and combining two underenrolled elementary schools. 
Along with a few other cuts, officials expect that to trim the gap by about $6.6 million.
About 12,000 students attend schools in the district.
In Compton, Ward received threats that law enforcement deemed credible and, like Kirk-Carter, he had a security detail. 
At one point, he asked the FBI whether he should consider carrying a weapon while off duty and away from campus. 
"Their response to me was, 'Hurry up,'" he said.
Kirk-Carter has California Highway Patrol security paid for mostly by the state and in part by the district; the cost doesn't exceed $200,000. 
Community members say the expenditure is unnecessary.
State officials have made one thing clear: Employees will be affected. 
About 72% of district expenditures are for salaries and benefits.
Peter Somberg, president of the Inglewood Teachers Assn., said the union would not return to the bargaining table. 
"We have a contract," he said, referring to the agreement made under Taylor.
The state has said repeatedly that the contract is void. 
The union in turn brought an unfair labor charge against the district.
Somberg said the proposed pay cuts of about 15% would be devastating to many of his members and that the state has yet to develop a long-term plan for stability. 
Rather, he said, the state is presenting a doomsday scenario to try to bring the union back to the table.
"If someone tells me they want to be my partner," he said, "they usually don't do it with a gun to my head."
At the contentious public hearing at Morningside High School, state officials provided handouts that spelled out the grim budget outlook.
"Despite our challenges, Inglewood's schools are open and educating children every day," the letter said. 
"The state's intervention means students can keep right on learning as usual."


Northampton, Northumbria and Swansea universities ban payday loan adverts 
Three universities have banned adverts from high-cost payday lenders after fresh fears were raised that unscrupulous firms are targeting hard-up students.
Northampton, Northumbria and Swansea have committed to never allowing payday lenders to advertise on their campuses and the National Union of Students is today launching a campaign to encourage more universities to join them.
“It’s clear that some payday lenders are targeting vulnerable students and the Government has so far failed to act so it’s important we do everything we can to limit their ability to reach our campuses,” said Pete Mercer, NUS national vice-president (welfare).
“Students are struggling to make ends meet and this is having a real impact on their well-being and their education.”
Payday lenders are currently under investigation by the Office of Fair Trading, which has proposed referring the sector to the Competition Commission, amid accusations of irresponsible lending and encouraging vulnerable people to take on expensive debt they’ll never be able to repay.
With interest rates quoted at more than 4,000 per cent APR, lenders have been accused of rolling over loans pushing people into a deadly spiral of debt.
MPs got into a row with the OFT last month by accusing the regulator of failing to control rogue payday lenders.
The Public Accounts Committee accused the watchdog of being “ineffective” and “timid”, and said it failed to identify risks of malpractice which have cost consumers at least £450m a year.
But the OFT hit back by pointing out that its powers to shut down rogue firms are limited. 
However its current probe into the sector has seen three of the country’s 50 largest lenders close for business and the OFT has written to the others to demand that they clean up their acts or face closure.
Research by the NUS has found that up to one in 10 students in vulnerable groups had resorted to using high-cost credit.
“Three times as many students with caring responsibilities use payday loans as other students,” said Mr Mercer.
The university bans follow last week’s U-turn by Bolton Wanderers which bowed to fan power by scrapping plans to feature payday lender Quick Quid as its shirt sponsor next season.
The move followed the lead of Sheffield Wednesday which refused to accept sponsorship from a payday lender, despite the firm offering 25 per cent more than usual to persuade the club to sign up.
Last week The Independent reported that unscrupulous lenders have been using religion to tempt borrowers with two firms claiming false links to religious institutions.
Paul Crayston, from the debt charity National Debtline, said using religion to prey on the vulnerable is “completely unacceptable”.
“If anyone is unsure that a lender they are considering borrowing from or have borrowed from is legitimate, they should seek free, impartial advice as soon as possible,” he advised.



Would you cryopreserve your head?
10 June 2013 Last updated at 10:02 GMT Help
A group of Oxford dons are spending roughly the same amount per month as a gym membership to be cryo-preserved after they die - or frozen in liquid nitrogen at -196C.
The hope is that in a few hundred years, technology will be developed enough to revive them.
Anders Sandberg told the Today programme's Evan Davis that that he is one of the academics planning to have his head frozen.


California tops list of states with water infrastructure needs
California could use $44.5 billion to fix aging water systems over the next two decades, according to an EPA assessment. 
Texas and New York are next in line.
By Bettina Boxall, Los Angeles Times
June 9, 2013, 5:36 p.m.
California could use $44.5 billion to fix aging water systems over the next two decades, according to a federal survey that placed the state at the top of a national list of water infrastructure needs.
Texas, at nearly $34 billion, and New York, with about $22 billion, were next in line.
The assessment, conducted by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in 2011 and released last week, is used to document the capital investment needs of public drinking water systems across the country. 
The EPA relies on the results to allocate grants through the Drinking Water State Revolving Fund.
All told, the survey revealed a $384-billion wish list of infrastructure projects through 2030 — $4.5 billion more than in the 2007 assessment.
In California and elsewhere, the biggest need was for repairing and upgrading water transmission and distribution lines. 
That will come as no surprise to residents of Los Angeles, where old mains routinely break, flooding city streets. 
Treatment projects were next on the list.
"The nation's water systems have entered a rehabilitation and replacement era in which much of the existing infrastructure has reached, or is approaching, the end of its useful life," EPA acting Administrator Robert Perciasepe said in a statement. 
"This is a major issue that must be addressed so that American families continue to have the access they need to clean and healthy water sources."
In April, the regional EPA administrator sent a letter of noncompliance to the California Department of Public Health, complaining that the state had failed to spend $455 million of federal money in another state revolving fund used to improve drinking-water quality in small rural communities with contaminated wells or other problems.
The EPA said the state had set much of the funding aside for projects that were not shovel-ready, while ready-to-go projects languished.


MPs say Severn barrage plan is significantly flawed
By Matt McGrath Environment correspondent, BBC News
The latest plan to build a barrage across the Severn to generate electricity has been severely criticised by a committee of MPs.
Hafren Power had outlined a £25bn tidal scheme to generate up to 5% of the UK's electricity needs.
But the House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Committee said it could not recommend the plan.
It said that on both economic and environmental grounds the case remained unproven.
In 2010, the then Energy Secretary Chris Huhne pulled the plug on public efforts to build a barrage saying there was no strategic case for the project. 
However, a private consortium called Hafren Power put forward another plan for an 18km-wide (11 miles) fixed scheme between Brean in England and Lavernock Point in Wales.
It would feature 1,026 bi-directional turbines that the twice daily tide would turn, generating 16.5 terawatt hours of electricity per year, equivalent to three nuclear power stations or 3,000 wind turbines.
But MPs were not convinced by the company's plans. 
There was concern that while the construction of the barrage would be privately funded, significant levels of government subsidy for the electricity would still be required for 30 years.
"We are not convinced that the economic case for the proposed barrage is strong enough," said committee chairman Tim Yeo, MP.
"We do not believe at this stage that the barrage would be competitive with other low carbon technologies."
Concerns were also raised over the environmental impact of the plan. 
There were worries that such a large artificial dam would impact flood risks, cause damage to intertidal habitats and harm fish.
According to Tim Yeo, the company had failed to answer serious environmental questions.
"Far more detail and evidence is needed before their project could be regarded as environmentally acceptable," he said.
Hafren Power said the MPs' report was "unhelpful and frustrating". 
It said the project would deliver £25bn in private finance, 20,000 construction jobs and the cheapest zero carbon electricity over its lifetime.
"We believe the environmental and economic issues can be solved with everyone working together," said Tony Pryor, the company's chief executive.
"It will also be much cheaper and last much longer than offshore wind farms which have high levels of public subsidy."
Hafren said their case had been strengthened after five major companies recently signed up to work on the project.
However, committee members were not convinced the barrage idea had enough public support.
The MPs' lack of support and enthusiasm for the scheme was welcomed by environmental campaigners.
"This report should bang the final nail in the coffin for the current Severn barrage proposal," said Mike Birkin, from Friends of the Earth.
"The scheme is not cost effective and has little public support."


China's latest manned space mission to launch June 11
(Reuters) - China will launch its next manned space flight on Tuesday, carrying three astronauts on a 15-day mission to an experimental space lab, the National Space Administration said, in the latest step towards the development of a space station.
The Shenzhou 10 spacecraft will launch from a remote site in the Gobi desert in China's far west at 5:38 p.m. (0938 GMT), Wu Ping, spokeswoman for China's manned space program, told a televised briefing on Monday.
Once in orbit, the craft will dock with the Tiangong (Heavenly Palace) 1, a trial space laboratory module, and the two male and one female astronauts will carry out various experiments and test the module's systems.
They will also give a lecture to students back on earth, Wu said.
China is still far from catching up with the established space superpowers, the United States and Russia.
But the Shenzhou 10 mission will be the latest show of China's growing prowess in space and comes while budget restraints and shifting priorities have held back U.S. manned space launches.
It will be China's fifth manned space mission since 2003.
China also plans an unmanned moon landing and deployment of a moon rover. Scientists have raised the possibility of sending a man to the moon, but not before 2020.



Defending Science Communication
Following criticism of a National Cancer Institute communications office budget, biologists defend the spending.
By Kate Yandell | June 10, 2013
The Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) has come to the defense of the National Cancer Institute’s (NCI) spending on communication and education. 
Earlier this year (April 12) Congress members criticized spending by the NCI’s Office of Communication and Education (OCE) and requested that the National Institutes of Health (NIH) send further records of its spending on communication. 
The request followed a report in The Cancer Letter in December claiming the NCI’s communication spending, at $45 million for 2012, was unusually high.
FASEB wrote a letter to Nature last week (May 30) saying that the congressional investigation was a distraction from the true problems facing medical research funding. 
“In our view, the criticisms devalue OCE activities and risk diverting attention away from the budget cuts that reduced the NIH’s capacity to fund biomedical research,” FASEB president Judith Bond and science policy analyst Bethany Drehman wrote.
In a press release, FASEB noted that the OCE’s expenditures were on valuable resources, including toll-free phone lines with information on cancer and cancer prevention, brochures, and the Physician Data Query, a database that provides information on clinical trials, medical terminology, cancer drugs, and more.
The society also pointed out that the OCE’s budget for 2012 made up less than 1 percent of the NCI’s spending, a small amount of money compared to the cuts imposed on the NCI due to the sequester. 
The institute’s total budget for 2013 is down nearly 6 percent from 2012 levels.


Global Alliance to Share Genomic Data
Leading medical and research centers around the world announce a plan to share massive amounts of genetic and clinical information.
More than 70 medical and research centers around the world have agreed to create an organized system to share vast amounts of genetic and clinical information, according to The New York Times. 
This “global alliance” released a white paper last week (June 3) announcing plans to thrash out standards on ethical and technical issues, such as patient privacy and data format, and to pave the way for a massive database that would be open to doctors and researchers everywhere.
“No single hospital, research group or even country alone is going to be able to collect all the data that will be needed to inform medicine and science,” David Altschuler, deputy director of the Broad Institute at Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who was part of the organizing committee behind the document, told The Guardian. 
“But if we're able to look across datasets, we'll have greater progress, and we'll be able to offer people better information.”
The plummeting cost of DNA sequencing over the past few years has resulted in an avalanche of genomic data. 
But to fully understand the relationships between mutations and disease, researchers have to compare genetic and clinical data from hundreds of thousands of patients and healthy individuals. 
That’s not possible at the moment because the information tends to be siloed at separate research centers—and there is no framework in place to allow for its exchange while also protecting the privacy of the patients who provide it.
“If we remain on the current path, the likely outcome will be a hodge-podge of balkanized systems—as developed in the U.S. for electronic medical records—a system that inhibits learning and improving health care,” the organizers wrote.
The challenge is to come up with a standardized format and a system for managing consent information, and then to create an international database. 
“[It’s] a utopian goal, but one that is hard to argue against,” Charles Sawyers of the Memorial Sloan-Ketting Cancer Center, who was also on the organizing committee that established the alliance, told Bloomberg. 
“Can we pull it off? That is a question I can’t answer.”


Gritty wharf at Port of L.A. will become marine research center
Plans call for City Dock 1, opened in 1913, to be converted into a nexus of laboratories and classrooms, fish hatcheries and berths for research vessels.
On a recent weekday morning, Daniel Pondella strode along a century-old stretch of concrete pylons and shabby warehouses in San Pedro.
As kelp swayed in the waves and terns circled overheard, Pondella recalled an elementary school field trip he took 40 years ago to this gritty wharf known as City Dock 1: "That was the day I decided to become a marine biologist."
Now, Pondella is involved in transforming the wharf into a marine research center at the heart of the Port of Los Angeles, the nation's busiest.
When City Dock 1 opened in 1913, it turned on a spigot for the Southern California economy through which $283 billion a year in international commerce now flows. 
Plans call for it to be converted into a nexus of laboratories and classrooms, fish hatcheries and berths for research vessels, which will explore the flows of Pacific currents, solutions to oceanic pollution and coastal erosion, and the rhythms of sea creatures from bacteria to 150-ton blue whales.
Pondella is director of the Southern California Marine Institute, which will become the center's first tenant when it moves from its aged confines on the port's Terminal Island. 
The institute will occupy nearly a quarter of what port officials expect will become 200,000 square feet of space housing universities, government agencies and industries, and a massive outdoor wave tank to study tsunamis.
The port plans to begin work this year on $31 million in seismic retrofits of the wharf, money it expects to recoup in lease payments from the new center.
The first of two construction phases is expected to begin next year with $123 million raised from philanthropic organizations and grants from government agencies. 
If all goes according to plan, by 2018 a converted warehouse will provide the Southern California Marine Institute with 47,800 square feet of space and circulating sea water for marine life support systems.
"There will be hundreds of people working here," said Pondella, whose institute is affiliated with a dozen universities in the region. 
"We'll rival the world's largest oceanic research institutions. But we'll differ from them because we'll be at the headlands of the Los Angeles region, and tapping the mind power of its major universities."
The project is expected to develop over the next 15 to 20 years, with donors to cover the estimated total cost of $500 million. 
Formal solicitations for funds are expected to begin later this year, officials said.
"Phase one is well-positioned in terms of working capital to design and build it," said Leonard J. Aube, executive director of the Annenberg Foundation, one of the largest family foundations in the United States. 
"But the project, overall, is far from done."
As the new center is phased in, it promises to bring changes to Los Angeles and, in particular, San Pedro, the port community L.A. annexed in 1909 to ensure that the inland city 20 miles away also had access to sea cargo. 
San Pedro now is rich with a heritage of fishing, commerce and union activism, with a vibrant arts district.
"Cargo and global trade made us a great port and will always be our core business," said Geraldine Knatz, the port's executive director and a marine biologist who has been a leading force in creating the center. 
"But adding this array of marine science, academia and related industry clusters to our public waterfront will bring a new dimension of economic opportunity to Los Angeles and redefine our stature as a Pacific Rim city."
The name of the center and of the nonprofit organization being created to fund and operate it will be unveiled at a June 17 event led by Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa.
"It is one of the most forward-thinking, powerful and creative projects to ever hit Los Angeles and San Pedro," said Camilla Townsend, a member of the City Dock 1 Advisory Cabinet and a former port commissioner.
Marine biologists are already submitting wish lists for the kinds of research projects that have become painstakingly conducted in inland laboratories.
Christopher G. Lowe, a professor of marine biology at Cal State Long Beach, was only half kidding when he said: "What I want is a tank 40 feet long, 20 feet wide and 15 feet deep — with water pumped in from outside the harbor — to study great white sharks.
"The challenge with marine laboratories has always been that you need coastal property, which in a place like Southern California is already well-developed or super-expensive," Lowe said. 
"To get a lab on a piece of Los Angeles' urban ocean is remarkable."
Pondella could not agree more.
Against a backdrop of bridges and forests of cranes reaching skyward, Pondella nodded toward the nearby breakwater entrance to the port, smiled and said: "The open ocean is right over there. How convenient is that?"


Leaders of Infant Trial Will Not Face Sanctions
US watchdog drops plans to discipline researchers who failed to disclose the full risks of an experimental trial conducted with premature infants.
Researchers who led a multi-center clinical trial on the effects of administering oxygen to extremely premature babies can breathe a little easier after the US government agency in charge of protecting research participants has suspended its call to sanction the scientists for failing to fully communicate the risks involved to the subjects’ parents. 
In a June 4 letter to administrators at the University of Alabama, Birmingham (UAB), which led the so-called SUPPORT trial, the US Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP) stated that it would suspend its previous decision to discipline researchers involved in the study for failing to fully inform parents of the potential risks involved.
The move came as discussion of the decision swirled on the internet and top officials at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), which funded the study, leading bioethicists, and pediatric researchers urged the OHRP to reconsider their move in a pair of articles published in last week’s issue of The New England Journal of Medicine. 
“[W]e respectfully disagree with the conclusions of the OHRP,” wrote three senior NIH officials, including NIH Director Francis Collins, in one of the pieces.
The SUPPORT trial ran from 2005 to 2009, giving more than 1300 extremely premature babies different concentrations of oxygen—all of which were within then-accepted standards of care—to study the causal relationship between the intervention and blindness. 
The results, which were published in 2010 in The New England Journal of Medicine, indicated that babies receiving lower oxygen concentrations were more likely to die but less likely to go blind.
In March 2013 the OHRP wrote a letter to UAB officials stating their concern that informed consent forms provided to parents enrolling their children in the SUPPORT trial—in which 23 prominent medical centers and research facilities participated—were inadequate. 
According to the OHRP, the forms failed to disclose to the parents any of the risks of the experimental oxygen-management interventions, including severe retinal damage, possible blindness, neurologic injury, and death. 
The agency asked that UAB administrators provide a “corrective action plan” to address the concerns.
But in the recent OHRP letter, the agency stated that it “does not and has never questioned whether the design of the SUPPORT study was ethical. 
It was a study that asked important questions and produced information that promises to advance both scientific knowledge and clinical care.”
And although it has decided to not to reprimand the researchers involved, the OHRP also said that it would be conducting an “open public meeting” on the topic.


Old Opportunity Mars rover makes rock discovery
Nasa's ageing Opportunity rover on Mars has just made what may be one of its most significant discoveries to date.
The nine-year-old robot has identified rock laden with what scientists believe to be clay minerals.
Their presence is an indication that the rock, dubbed Esperance, has been altered at some point in the past through prolonged contact with water.
Opportunity has seen a clay-bearing outcrop before but scientists say this is by far the best example to date.
"It's very rich," said Steve Squyres, the rover's principal investigator.
"We've been discovering evidence for water on Mars since we first landed back in 2004. What's different here?"
"If you look at all of the water-related discoveries that have been made by Opportunity, the vast majority of them point to water that was a very low pH - it was acid."
"We run around talking about water on Mars. In fact, what Opportunity has mostly discovered, or found evidence for, was sulphuric acid."
"Clay minerals only tend to form at a more neutral pH. This is water you could drink. This is water that was much more favourable for things like pre-biotic chemistry - the kind of chemistry that could lead to the origin of life."
Prof Squyres, who is affiliated to Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, said he was inclined to put Esperance in his personal top five discoveries made on the Red Planet by Opportunity and her twin rover, Spirit, which stopped working in 2011. 
The clays are aluminium-rich, possibly of the type montmorillonite. 
However, because Opportunity's X-ray spectrometer can only discern the atomic elements in a rock, and not their mineralogical arrangement, no-one can say for sure.
Nonetheless, the mere occurrence of clays is further proof that Mars was much warmer and wetter billions of years ago; a very different place to the cold, desiccated world it has become.
And these results complement nicely those of Nasa's newer rover Curiosity, which has also identified clays at its landing site almost half-way around the planet's equator.
The old robot made its find at a location called Cape York, which is sited on the rim of a 22km-wide crater known as Endurance.
Mission managers have now commanded it to start moving along the ridge to a destination dubbed Solander Point.
There is an expectation that Opportunity will find a deeper stack of rocks at the new location to follow up the Esperance water story.
"Maybe [we can] try to reconstruct the actual depositional environment of these materials and whether they were lacustrine - that is, formed by a lake - or fluvial (river) or an alluvial fan (network of streams), or whatever," said deputy principal investigator Ray Arvidson, of Washington University, St Louis.
Opportunity is now operating well beyond its expected lifetime.
When it landed at Eagle Crater in January 2004, Nasa hoped to get at least 90 working Martian days (sols) from the machine. 
Remarkably, it continues to roll beyond 3,300 sols.
It has an "arthritic" robotic arm, its solar panels are losing efficiency, and it drives backwards to save wear on its locomotion system.
It is also now having to contend with glitchy flash memory. 
But the US space agency is determined to keep pushing the vehicle for as long as possible.
"Remember, the rover continues in a very hostile environment on Mars," said John Callas, Nasa's Opportunity project manager.
"The rover could have a catastrophic failure at any moment. So, each day is a gift." 	


Opinion: The Dilemma of Diversity
The NIH remains a Caucasian-dominated workforce. 
Why haven’t the agency’s efforts to diversify been successful?
A 2011–2012 report on the demographics of the scientific workforce of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) revealed a very dismal state of diversity at our nation’s premier biomedical and behavioral sciences research agency: only 1.2 percent of tenure track faculty and 1.1 percent of senior investigators were African American, and the proportion of Hispanics was not much better, hovering around 3 percent. 
These numbers suggest little progress from what was recently described in Science by economist Donna Ginther of the University of Kansas and colleagues as “a long history of working to increase the diversity of its intramural and extramural biomedical workforce.” 
Given the agency’s efforts—and financial support—to diversify the biomedical workforce at leading research universities and institutions, this is a dismal failure.
The NIH of course has lots of diversity: almost every janitor, dish washer, mail man, and parking lot attendant is a minority! When I first started working at the NIH in 2011 as a Ruth Kirschstein Fellow, I could not find a black barber in either Potomac or Bethesda, Maryland, but I did find one at the Clinical Center on the NIH campus. 
The lack of diversity within the NIH’s scientific ranks, however, was a surprise to me. 
Despite not being reflected in the numbers, the NIH’s efforts to diversify the extramural biomedical research workforce have personally impacted me, an African American scientist. 
The research and research education activities in my career, first at Tuskegee University (TU), one of the leading Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), and then at Virginia Tech, have been in no small measure due to the diversity efforts of the NIH. 
Initial support received from the NHGRI in 1997, during the period that Collins was the institute’s director, allowed me to help form a 3-year research training program at the University of Washington’s Genome Center in Seattle. 
This program in turn led to the establishment of a comparative animal genomics program at TU, which resulted in training activities for minority undergraduate and graduate students, as well as faculty and staff like myself.
Later, my service as a permanent member on the NHGRI Genome Study section was due to my genomics research and education activities as an independent investigator at TU, and my experience as a genomics grant reviewer may have contributed to my lab’s success in competing for several research and training grants at Virginia Tech since 2000, as has been suggested elsewhere. 
In turn, the minority-focused training grants awarded to us have resulted in at least 10 minority PhDs who are currently postdoctoral trainees at institutions like Georgetown University, the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 
However, the success of a few scientists in adding diversity to the biomedical workforce is clearly not enough make noticeable dent in the lack of underrepresented minorities carrying out biomedical and behavioral sciences at the NIH and elsewhere.
But the current leader of the NIH is no slouch when it comes to diversity. 
Director Francis Collins established the “road map” in the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) that has yielded modest but significant additions of underrepresented minorities to the genomic research workforce. 
He even brought in a “mercenary,” Clifton Poodry from the old Minorities Opportunities in Research (MORE) Division, which had as its primary mission increasing minority participation in biomedical and behavioral sciences research. 
Poodry’s efforts and those of his colleagues at MORE, involving several meetings with diverse stakeholders at major research universities, led to the creation of several successful extramural diversity training programs that provide funding to support minorities underrepresented in biomedical and behavioral sciences research at the pre-baccalaureate and pre-doctoral levels.
The NIH should now apply similar effort to diversifying its own staff. 
One realistic approach could be to partner with faculty at HBCUs that are within a 2-hour driving radius of the Bethesda campus. 
Local colleges offer a unique opportunity for NIH researchers to more frequently associate with interested minority faculty and students, thus increasing the “comfort level” that many believe is low between minority trainees and Caucasian research scientists at the NIH. 
Minority faculty and students from nearby HBCUs will also have a significant opportunity to network with distinguished scientists who visit the NIH as part of the NIH’s flagship seminar series, WALS (Wednesday Afternoon Lecture Series), and other talks and conferences. 
Recent speakers have included Collins; National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases head Anthony Fauci; and National Cancer Institute Director Harold Varmus, a Nobel Laureate and former NIH director. 
Encounters with these successful scientists can provide minority students and faculty insight into the path one needs to take to be a successful scientist, something lacking at their home institutions.
In addition to simply exposing minority researchers to the NIH’s top dogs, NIH-HBCU partnerships could serve to generate successful new research programs. 
For example, as director of the NHGRI, Collins initiated a partnership with the Howard University, an HBCU in Washington, DC. 
The results was a collaborative genome program that led to involvement of several minority researchers and the later recruitment of Charles Rotimi as an NHGRI Branch Chief—part of the 0.8 percent of African American branch chiefs in the intramural program. 
While science was at the foundation of the collaboration, it had the added benefit of increasing awareness at Howard of genome research. 
At the same time, NIH scientists gained exposure to an HBCU.
Since the NIH’s intramural science program is often a complement to the extramural science programs it supports, it’s time to make NIH’s intramural scientific diversity a model. 
It is not enough to support diversity in science, NIH needs to live it. 
Role models are needed for young students, and the NIH has an abundance of them who could mentor minority youth at nearby universities. 
These relationships should also test the limit of the oft-stated hope that “a good mentor does not have to look or sound like you.”


International Energy Agency urges stop-gap climate action
A sticking plaster solution for climate change has been proposed by the world's top energy think tank, the International Energy Agency (IEA).
It says climate change could pass a critical level if the world waits until 2020 for the planned comprehensive UN deal to cut emissions.
In the meantime, it recommends some short-term measures.
These include action on energy efficiency, coal-fired power stations, and fossil fuel subsidies.
The IEA authors believe governments will find it easier to take smaller focused measures than to shift their entire economies to clean energy systems.
The agency repeats its warning that two-thirds of existing fossil fuel reserves cannot be burned if emissions are to be held within the projected danger threshold of a 2C rise.
It wants immediate major investment in carbon capture and storage technology to enable more fossil fuels to be used. 
But this technology is years behind schedule and still untried in power stations at industrial scale.
The report, Re-drawing the Energy Climate Map, appeals to politicians' self-interest by dangling a carrot of competitive advantage to nations that can save more energy and cut emissions cheaply.
Its latest tactic offers by 2020 to reduce emissions by 3.1 gigatonnes of CO2 equivalent (3.1 Gt CO2-eq) at what it says will be no net economic cost.
Energy efficiency is the bedrock of the approach (49%) with recommended energy performance standards in all countries for lights, heating, and appliances.
Setting standards is a proven way of reducing energy use and saving consumers costs in the long term, but new standards are typically resisted strongly by manufacturers wishing to continue profits from current models. 
More than half the projected savings can come from the buildings sector, the report says.
Limiting the use of old polluting coal-fired power stations is another idea, which the IEA says will also combat air pollution. 
New plants cost money, though, especially if they are the most efficient type that the IEA recommends.
Halving methane releases from upstream oil and gas operations by 2020 is feasible at affordable cost, the report says. 
Methane releases produced 1.1 gt CO2 equivalent in 2010.
The last of the four stop-gap solutions proposed is already in line with a resolution adopted by the G20 countries – the partial phase out of fossil fuel subsidies.
This should be accelerated, the IEA says. 
Dirty fossil fuels receive $523bn a year in subsidies - six times more than clean renewables.
This policy will prove controversial as removal of subsidies tends to provoke a sharp political response, but the report points out that the policy is attractive to national treasuries looking to cut budgets.
The report notes that the growth in China's emissions has been among the lowest for a decade as renewables have grown and carbon intensity targets begin to bite. 
Emissions in the US are 200 million tonnes down, thanks to a switch to gas from coal, bringing emissions down to the levels of the mid-1990s. 
But emissions in Japan are up 70 million tonnes following the Fukushima nuclear accident.
Overall, global emissions rose 1.4% despite the economic slowdown. 
On current trends, the world is moving further away from its target of limiting global temperature rise to 2C, the report says.
The document only looks at the energy sector, the biggest contributor to global emissions. 
Other recent positive measures towards tackling climate change have been the agreement between the US and China to phase out HFC gases and a growing international pact to limit pollutants like black carbon, which settles on snow and makes it absorb more heat.


TEDGlobal welcomes robot cockroaches
A project aimed at creating cyborg cockroaches is being launched at the TEDGlobal conference in Edinburgh.
The insects, intended as a neuroscience learning tool, are controlled via a mobile phone.
The Technology, Entertainment and Design conference specialises in showcasing new technologies.
The theme of this year's conference is "think again", and the line-up of speakers is diverse, including a monk and a self-styled gentleman thief.
Among the technology on offer this year will be RoboRoach, the brainchild of neuroscientist Greg Gage.
The cyborg insect is created by attaching a backpack that communicates directly with neurons in the cockroach's antennae.
The neurons convey information back to the insect's brain using electricity.
The cockroach needs to undergo what Mr Gage calls "short surgery under anaesthetic" in order to have wires placed inside the antennae.
Then the backpack can be placed on the insect and its movements controlled via a mobile phone or other device.
The backpack communicates directly with neurons in the cockroach's antennae, allowing users to set the direction in which the insect moves.
Mr Gage will take to the TED stage on Wednesday to demonstrate what the insect can do.
"This is not just a gimmick, the technique is the same as that used to treat Parkinson's disease and in cochlear implants," he told BBC News.
"The point of the project is to create a tool to learn about how our brain works."
He said that the team had thought a lot about the ethics of using insects in this way.
"We are pretty certain that this doesn't impose pain on the insect and they still have free will because they adapt very quickly and ignore the stimulation," he said.
The RSPCA did not respond to a BBC request for comment.
Mr Gage heads up Backyard Brains, a start-up of scientists and engineers aiming to change the way neuroscience is taught. 
The kits are primarily aimed at schools.
"The audience for this is teachers. We would like to see this in more high schools," he said.
Already budding neuroscientists have made some interesting discoveries, with high school children in New York working out that the pace at which the insects adapt to the stimulation can be slowed by randomising the signal.
"This is a hands-on way of understanding the properties of neurons and doing critical thinking about how they work," said Mr Gage.
"One in five people will have a neurological disorder in their lives and there are often no cures for them. Getting kids interested in neuroscience is important."
The team is launching a Kickstarter campaign aiming to raise $10,000 (£6,400) to develop the hardware, which will be made in Michigan.
The kits come with backpacks, batteries and electrodes as well as optional insects, The insects could not be shipped outside of the US but could be sourced locally, said Mr Gage.


Asian tigers at risk from domestic dog distemper virus
Some of the world's rarest big cat species are facing a potentially deadly threat from a virus carried by domestic dogs, a wildlife expert has warned.
John Lewis, director of Wildlife Vets International, said there was evidence that Indonesian tigers were at risk.
Canine distemper virus has evolved in recent decades from infecting only dogs to affecting other animal groups.
Dr Lewis plans to work with Indonesian vets to develop a strategy to protect the nation's tigers from the virus.
A close relative of measles, Canine distemper virus (CDV) was first described at the beginning of the 20th Century and has been cited as contributing to the demise of the thylacine (commonly known as the Tasmanian tiger as a result of the black stripes on its back).
"If you wind the clock back about 30 or 40 years, it was a dog disease - it was a canine virus and only affected dogs," Dr Lewis explained.
"But in the intervening years, the virus has evolved and has changed its pattern of animals it can infect to include marine mammals (such as seals) and big cats."
Reservoir dogs
He told BBC News that CDV needed a reservoir, like a population of dogs, to remain effective as a pathogen.
These conditions were present when the first case of the disease affecting wild big cats was documented, he recalled.
"In the mid-1990s, in the Serengeti, Africa, about 30% of the lions died from CDV, which came from dogs in surrounding villages.
"It has also been recognised in the Asian big cat populations," he added.
"Since 2000, in the Russian Far East, there have been a few cats reported as behaving strangely and coming into villages, apparently not showing much fear towards people.
"In the past few years, tissue from at least a couple of those cats have now been confirmed as showing the presence of CDV infection.
"There have not been too many cases at the moment, we think about three or four, but we think there could have been more that have gone undiagnosed."
While some tigers appear as if they are able to build up a reasonable immunity response, most of the animals do succumb to the disease if they are exposed to the virus.
Dr Lewis explained that symptoms manifested themselves in a number of ways:
"Some will die as a result of respiratory problems, such as pneumonia for example.
"Some will have neurological problems, such as losing the fear of people or having seizures."
But, he added: "We do not have enough information on CDV in tigers to know what percentage go on to die; we just have a little bit of data from zoos and a little bit of data from the wild.
"There are a lot of cases of distemper in the region and tigers are partial to eating dogs.
"For a tiger to take a dog on the periphery of a village is not usual at all, so you do have the circumstances that would bring tigers into contact with CDV."
Although it was assumed the cause of CDV infection in tigers was a result of coming into contact with dogs carrying the virus, Dr Lewis said that a research project was under way to look at the source of CDV in Amur tigers (also known as Siberian tigers) in the Russian Far East.
Worrying signs
The behaviour change in tigers was particularly worrying, Dr Lewis observed.
"This puts them at big risk because they lose their fear of poachers or they bring themselves in situations of conflict, such as playing with traffic."
On a recent visit to the Indonesian island of Sumatra, he said conversations with local wildlife vets seemed to indicate that CDV could already be present in the population of the critically endangered Sumatran tiger.
They told him that they had seen strange behaviour displays by tigers, such as the big cats coming into villages and losing their fear of people.
"To me, that suggests that distemper is already beginning to have an impact on tigers in Sumatra," he warned.
"But before you say 'yes, that is definitely the result of CDV', you need diagnostic testing of brain tissue.
"The big threats facing tigers are habitat loss and degradation and poaching, but I think the third big threat now is likely to be disease, particularly one like CDV."
The Sumatran tiger is only found on the island and population estimates suggest that there are fewer than 700 left in the wild, of which only 40% are viable mature individuals.
Dr Lewis is returning to Sumatra in September to bring together all the vets from all the different areas that come into contact with tigers.
"The goal is to thrash out a very simple way of deciding what samples need to be taken from all tigers that are handled by humans throughout Sumatra, in order to help us with diagnostics," he explained.
"We also need to thrash out what samples need to be taken from domestic dog populations.
"We need to work out where we can send these samples for laboratory testing. 
We need to work out how we are going to store and move these samples.
"Once we have got that nailed down then we start work and try to design some sort of mitigation strategy, and that won't be easy."


Treatments of physical and mental health are coming together
Physicians and therapists traditionally haven't collaborated much when treating the same patient, but the federal healthcare law is spurring a change.
Many days, the sheer weight of Iszurette Hunter's clinical depression becomes more than she can lift. 
She clings to her bed in her South Los Angeles home. 
Important obligations slide away, including keeping appointments with doctors who are trying to control her asthma and high blood pressure.
"I don't have no desire," she explains.
As the nation seeks to extend healthcare coverage to millions of new and in many cases chronically ill patients, one of the great parallel challenges to controlling costs and improving delivery of care will be managing the mental health problems of people like Hunter.
Already, about 2 million patients a year receiving care at government-subsidized community health centers also must be treated for depression, anxiety and other mental conditions, according to the National Assn. of Community Health Centers.
Officials expect many newly insured patients arriving at doctor's offices and urban and rural clinics to have mental health complications. 
Beginning next year, some 2.3 million additional people may require mental health services through Medicaid, the public health insurance program for the poor, according to a study published in the American Journal of Psychiatry. 
Failing to diagnose and treat mental problems early can lead to far costlier visits to emergency rooms and hospitals later.
"People who are depressed or anxious or having other problems are less likely to get preventative or other primary care," said Roderick Shaner, medical director of Los Angeles County's Department of Mental Health. 
"Their illnesses become greater in acuity before they are seen."
Traditionally, primary care doctors and mental health practitioners have tended to treat the same patients with little coordination, experts say. 
Now, driven by the federal healthcare overhaul, officials in L.A. County and around the nation are confronting the financial and health consequences of poor collaboration.
County health departments are training physicians to better identify depression and other mental health problems. 
Doctors and therapists are sharing more information with each other about their patients. 
And health centers like To Help Everyone, or T.H.E., Clinic, where Hunter is treated, are expanding their mental health services.
The Affordable Care Act also expands mental health benefits and requires new health insurance plans to require depression screenings. 
During a speech last week, President Obama said improving diagnosis and treatment for people with mental illness is essential.
"It's not enough to help more Americans seek treatment," he said. 
"We also have to make sure that the treatment is there when they're ready to seek it."
In a small exam room at the South Los Angeles clinic one afternoon, Manuel Mares told the doctor his head was pounding, he felt dizzy and he had been vomiting. 
The previous month, Mares said, he had been to the emergency room three times with similar symptoms. 
Doctors there performed various exams but found nothing physically wrong. 
Mares said they diagnosed him with anxiety and prescribed medication.
Fidgeting and talking fast, Mares, 47, said he felt desperate. 
He hadn't worked in a year because of a shoulder injury. 
His wife had recently had surgery and his son's asthma was flaring up. 
"It's like when you begin to put water in an empty cup and you put drop by drop in the cup until there is no more capacity," he said. 
"There has to be a limit."
A clinic physician gave Mares a different prescription and urged him to see the clinic's therapist, Neil Martin. 
But he left without doing so.
Many of the clinic's patients have depression, which can cause symptoms such as headaches and cramps. 
They find it difficult to overcome because of other pressures such as getting a job, buying food and finding a place to live, Martin said. 
"Their problems are multifaceted," he said. 
"It's so linked, physical and mental health."
Martin says he tries to break the cycle of despair by identifying his patients' most pressing problem and working toward a solution.
That's crucial to keeping patients healthy and reducing demands on the most expensive parts of the healthcare system, officials say. 
"When you are depressed, your pain is worse," said Derrick Butler, associate medical director at T.H.E. Clinic. 
"When your pain is worse, you're more depressed."
Around the U.S., doctors and nurse practitioners typically spend just 15 minutes with patients — scarcely enough time to assess immediate physical ailments, let alone mental health issues, said John Bartlett, a senior advisor in the mental health program at the Carter Center.
"It's a huge unrecognized problem," Bartlett said. 
"And it really makes them continue to suffer.... Their medical conditions just don't get better."
At T.H.E. Clinic, having a therapist available means staff members can compare notes on patients' physical and mental health, and counseling can begin more quickly, said nurse practitioner Sandeep Lehil. 
"If you send them somewhere else, you never know if they are going to follow up," she said.
One of Martin's patients, Robert Brown, 52, is homeless and sleeping at a shelter. 
He sees a doctor for his diabetes and glaucoma and also suffers from depression and bipolar disorder. 
Brown recalled he was a "wreck" when he first came to the clinic and felt like walking in front of a bus. 
After counseling sessions and medication, he told Martin during a recent visit, "I won't say I'm happy, but I'm content."
Integrating more mental health services with medical care in community clinics reduces the stigma patients may feel discussing emotional problems, said Robin Kay, chief deputy director of the L.A. County Department of Mental Health.
On a Friday morning, a new patient, Cindy Ayers, 56, visited Martin. 
She had been referred after a medical visit the previous week. 
Her foot tapped nervously.
"Cindy, how can I help you?" Martin asked.
She was a heroin addict, Ayers said, and had been sober for years. 
Recently she relapsed and was hospitalized. 
She was feeling anxious.
After Ayers completed a written assessment, Martin said, "Your anxiety level is very high, and your depression level is high." Martin asked whether she was feeling suicidal. 
Ayers shook her head no.
"I want you to promise me you're not going to do that," he said.
"No, sir. I promise. I want to be alive.... I just want to be normal."
"We're here for you," Martin said. 
"One day at a time."


Yosemite visitors reflect on deadly mistakes along a fabled trail
At least 14 people have gone over falls along Yosemite National Park's Mist Trail in the last decade. 
None survived.
YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK — The two sisters boarded the morning bus to the Happy Isles trail head, ice cream cones in hand.
For 50 years, their tradition has been to start a day on Mist Trail with some mint chocolate chip.
Before they left on this year's trip, friends told Patty Frehler, 67, and Suzanne Barovick, 66, "Don't go over the falls." And they weren't entirely joking.
On June 1, Aleh Kalman, 19, was swimming above Nevada Fall and the current carried him over the precipice. 
Last August, 6- and 10-year-old brothers were swept downriver below Vernal Fall. 
The year before, the river carried three young people over the top of 317-foot Vernal as a crowd of helpless picnickers watched in horror.
At least 14 people have gone over falls along the Mist Trail in the last 10 years. 
None survived.
Three days after the latest death, the line between adventure and foolishness, and whether the National Park Service should do more to protect people from making deadly mistakes, was on the minds of many people on the fabled trail.
"We've been coming to Yosemite since I was 18 and back then I don't think we ever heard of a death," Frehler said. 
"Nothing's really changed. Same mountains. Same river. So, why are so many more people dying?"
Frehler considered the first stretch of shady, paved path, where the Merced River bubbled beside a stone wall.
"It looks innocent. Maybe they need bigger warning signs," she said.
Her husband, Bob Bentley, strongly disagreed.
"They have more precautions now and they haven't done any good. It's like air bags in cars — people just drive faster," he said.
Less than a mile into the hike, the first bridge offered a jaw-dropping glimpse of Vernal Fall in the distance. 
Bob Heath, 83, held hands with Evelyn Treadgold, 84, and looked at a view he hadn't seen since 1951.
When Heath was fighting fires in the park, he'd go on all-day hikes. 
He didn't always exercise caution, he conceded, "But, I'll tell you what, I never went swimming above a waterfall."
Glacier-cold water flowed under the bridge. 
In some spots it looked deceptively calm with clear pools revealing every pebble.
A boy about 8 years old stood on a large boulder in the river. 
It was near where the young brothers, on an extended family outing, went for a swim last summer and were immediately swept downriver.
"You can't save someone who falls in this river. If you try, you'll die too. It's granite. It's wet," said Doug Chavez, 42, with a hint of anger even after the boy had rock-hopped back to shore.
On the day Kalman went over the fall, Chavez, a San Francisco Outward Bound instructor, had been hiking with his nieces and nephews in Yosemite Valley. 
He heard the helicopters. 
"I didn't even know what had happened, but I told the kids, 'Someone just died.' I wanted to scare the crap out of them," he said. 
"Especially my nephew. He's 8 and he keeps…" — he interrupted himself to yell — "Andrew! Get down! That rock is too close to the water."
At the end of the bridge, the Park Service had posted a bright yellow warning: "Stay back from moving water."
Soon the trail became a staircase blasted out of granite. 
Irregular steps, many of them three feet high, climbed alongside the fall. 
Big clouds of mist floated over, drenching hikers as thoroughly as a log ride at an amusement park.
The staircase changed direction and crossed to the granite expanse above Vernal Fall — one of Yosemite's most popular spots. 
A summer day can see 2,000 visitors.
A jovial group took turns posing for pictures in the corner of a guard rail in front of the fall. 
In the 2011 tragedy, two people in a church party — first-time visitors — stepped over the rail to pose for a photo. 
One slipped. 
Both fell. 
Another friend tried to save them. 
All three died.
On previous visits, Edward and Shanti Johnson, dancers with the Southern California Dance Theater in Long Beach, posed in the popular corner. 
But on this day, with baby daughter Makhana, they took their vacation photo yards away in the center of dry rock.
"We talked about how more people have died on this trail than any other in the park," said Shanti, 37. 
"And when I showed Makhana the river — I know she's only 7 months old, she can't understand me but, still, — I told her 'Beautiful water. Look at the pretty water. But remember we stay behind the rail.' "
A few yards away, Alex Rodriguez, 21, sat with a church group from Van Nuys. 
Many were trembling and exhausted; one girl was in tears. 
Rodriguez looked entranced, gazing at the river.
"At first I didn't feel like I was supposed to be here. It kind of felt like no one was supposed to be here. But after a while you get used to it," he said.
He said the water looked tempting, but he would never consider swimming.
"I'm not stupid," he said. 
"It's like common sense."
Though four of the recent deaths have been from city church groups, Pride Metcalf, one of this group's leaders, said it was good to introduce young people who had never been out of the suburbs to nature.
"Look, they live in neighborhoods with drive-bys. Their world can be rather small. We bring them up to these vistas to show them they have options," he said. 
"And we tell them in graphic detail what can happen when you don't follow rules in the wilderness."
For the bulk of the crowd, the top of Vernal was as far as they would go. 
But the trail led on, past Emerald Pool on the "step" between two waterfalls. 
The Park Service strongly advises visitors against even wading in this spot, yet on a hot day some swimmers still take their chances against the current. 
On a universal "No Swimming" sign — a swimmer inside a circle with a line slashed across him — someone had tried to rub out the slash.  
When Nevada Fall came into view, its plumes seemed to freeze-frame in bright white clouds. 
The water free-falls for the first third of the way before hitting a ledge and billowing up, like a snowy avalanche.
On the day Kalman died, a joint group of three Slavic churches, some 85 people, were relaxing near a footbridge about 150 feet above the fall, according to authorities.
Kalman was on a boulder in the river with another swimmer. 
The two jumped in to swim back. 
One made it; Kalman didn't.
On this day, two National Park Service employees were moving quickly down the trail, dodging hikers. 
When tourists asked them what they were doing, their stock answer was "preventative safety measures."
It isn't their job to police the river. 
One said he didn't think it should be.
"How do you decide what is safe for who and when?" he asked. 
"This is wilderness and people are free to make their own choices."
He moved down the mountain on his real task — searching for Kalman's body.


Abenomics fuel Japanese economic boom
Japan's economy has expanded faster than previously thought. 
Tokyo has revised upward its growth figure for the first quarter, in a sign that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's economic policy, called Abenomics, seems to work.
In the first quarter of 2013, Japan's economy grew 4.1 percent compared with the same three months a year ago, the government in Tokyo said Monday as it revised a preliminary estimate of 3.5 percent growth.
Compared with the previous quarter, the country's gross domestic product expanded by a revised 1 percent, the Cabinet Office said in a report.
According to the data, the rise was mainly due to increasing domestic demand which was 0.6 percent higher than in the previous quarter. 
Private consumption, which accounts for about 60 percent of gross domestic product, increased by 0.9 percent.
Since winning an election in December, conservative Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has pushed through a new economic policy in an effort to pull the world's third-largest economy out of 15 years in the doldrums. 
Sometimes nicknamed Abenomics, the policy includes strong government spending as well as aggressive monetary easing on the part of the Bank of Japan.
As a result, Japan's national currency, the Yen, has plummeted about 20 percent, helping the country's exports to become more competitive. 
Official figures also published Monday, showed that Japan's trade surplus had doubled year-on-year to 750 billion yen (5.8 billion euros).
In April, the central bank already upgraded its growth outlook for the whole of 2013 from an earlier prediction of 2.3-percent growth to 2.9 percent now.
On Monday, Japanese shares surged on the good economic figures, with the Nikkei 225 Stock Market closing 4.94 percent higher.


CEO Jennings quits at Karstadt department stores
German retailer Karstadt has confirmed reports at the weekend that its Chief Executive Andrew Jennings will step down at the end of the year. 
The resignation comes as the department store chain struggles to survive.
Karstadt Chief Executive Andrew Jennings would not prolong his contract, which was going to expire at the end of 2013, the German department store chain announced Sunday.
In a statement, the Essen-based company denied a report in Germany's mass-circulation "Bild" that the resignation was the result of differences between Jennings and Karstadt owner and billionaire investor Nicolas Berggruen.
Dismissing reports that the two had clashed as incorrect, the company said that Berggruen and the Karstadt management had a harmonious understanding on the continuation of the Karstadt strategy.
After the collapse of German retail and tourism conglomerate Arcandor in 2010, Berggruen took over the heavily indebted Karstadt department stores, saving more than 25,000 jobs in Germany.
In 2011, Berggruen hired Andrew Jennings as CEO - a British national who had previously headed Woolworths in South Africa.
In 2012, Jennings launched a major restructuring program called "Karstadt 2015," envisaging modernizations, the expansion of the company's online business as well as about 2,000 job cuts.
In addition, Jennings also announced that Karstadt intended to freeze wages for an indefinite period to become profitable again - a move which draw hefty protest from worker representatives and trade unions.
At the weekend, Bild newspaper also reported that Karstadt stocks were held by Nicolas Berggruen Charitable Trust, a holding company situated on Virgin Islands. 
The British overseas territory is known to be a so-called tax haven, helping corporations from around the world to avoid paying taxes in their home countries.
A spokeswoman for Berggruen said he did not profit personally from the trust.


Dole Food is focusing on low-hanging fresh fruit
Dole sold its worldwide packaged-goods units and its Asia fresh-produce business this year to focus on its fresh produce elsewhere in the world.
Dole Food Co. introduced mainland Americans to the Hawaiian pineapple more than a century ago and grew the fresh fruit business into a global empire.
But the Westlake Village food company has trimmed down considerably. 
The company sold its worldwide packaged-goods units and its Asia fresh-produce business to Japanese firm Itochu Corp. for $1.7 billion this year to focus more narrowly on its fresh produce elsewhere in the world.
The company, also a major provider of bananas, expects lower revenue but higher profit as it concentrates on its fresh vegetable and fruit businesses in the Western Hemisphere, Europe and Africa.
Dole, which helped make pineapples one of Hawaii's top exports, retains sprawling farms of the fruit in the Aloha State.
The sale of its packaged goods and Asia units to Itochu also meant a big leadership change for the company.
Dole's chief executive, David A. DeLorenzo, stepped down to run Itochu. Ninety-year-old Chairman David H. Murdock, a self-made billionaire who has served as chairman of Dole since 1985, added DeLorenzo's job to his roles.
The latest
It's not clear how long Murdock, who retains more than 40% of the company's shares, will serve as chief executive or whether the company will search for a new leader. 
Murdock did not participate in the company's first-quarter conference call with analysts, which was led by C. Michael Carter, president and chief operating officer.
As a global business, the company said it plans to acquire three new specially refrigerated container ships for its operations on the West Coast, suspending a share buyback program to fund the purchases.
The company also said it is marketing more than 20,000 acres of land that it is not farming on the island of Oahu.
Accomplishments
Founded in 1851 as the Hawaiian Pineapple Co., Dole became a leading innovator of canned and processed fruits in the 20th century.
James Drummond Dole — the cousin of Sanford Dole, the Hawaiian jurist and first governor of the island state — used his connections to capitalize on rapid advances in technology and canning. 
The company made pineapples popular and ubiquitous in grocery aisles across the country.
Murdock, the son of a traveling salesman, has controlled the company since 1985 and served as chief executive into 2007.
He took the company private in 2003 in a deal valued at $2.5 billion and, six years later, took it public again, in part, to pay off debt from going private.
Challenges
Since its shares started trading publicly again in 2009, Dole has struggled to gain major interest from investors. 
After the sale to Itochu, it was left with a much more volatile business.
Recent weather extremes, for instance, have made it tough on the fresh fruit and vegetable business and have disrupted the company's ability to deliver stable earnings.
In particular, the company's strawberry farms in California have been exposed to "extreme warm weather followed by unusual cold weather and now warm weather again," the company said last month in releasing its first-quarter financial results.
The company said it also expects overall lower earnings from its bananas and berries operations this year. 
Dole has refinanced its debt and reduced it $50 million to $1.64 billion.
Last year, it lost $142 million on $4.2 billion in sales, compared with a profit of $42 billion on $4.8 billion in sales a year earlier.
Analyst views
One analyst rates the stock a buy, two recommend holding it and two suggest selling. 
Analysts estimate that shares will be trading at $10.50 a year from now, 63 cents higher than Friday's closing price.
"While Dole's commodity-centric capital allocation track record suggests risk, we think its valuation is cheap enough to offer a compelling … opportunity," wrote Jonathan Feeney, an analyst with Janney Capital Markets.


Fees for airline extras have made the trip to Europe
Passengers of the major carriers there are facing the kinds of charges — for checked bags, seat upgrades and onboard food — that those in the U.S. do.
The era of passenger fees — charges for checked bags, seat upgrades and onboard food — began to take hold in the U.S. when airlines tried to offset their losses from surging fuel prices in 2008.
Now, with Europe in the grip of the longest recession in decades, the trend of charging passengers for such extras is taking off with the full-service airlines across the pond.
Taken together, 53 of the world's major airlines collected $27.1 billion in passenger fees and other charges in 2012, up 19% compared with $22.6 billion raised in 2011 by 50 airlines, according to a new report by IdeaWorks, a Shorewood, Wis., airline consulting firm.
A bigger share of those fees are coming from major European airlines, which have struggled with Europe's economic slump and stiff competition from low-cost airlines that have reaped hefty revenues from passenger fees for years.
The Dutch airline KLM became the first full-service European carrier in April to charge bag fees. 
Members of the airline's loyalty program are exempted from the fees.
Air France and KLM, which are owned by the same French holding company, jumped onto the list of the world's top 10 generators of passenger fees for the first time this year, ranking seventh by collecting $1.2 billion, according to the IdeaWorks report. 
The two airlines did not publicly release ancillary fee information last year.
In addition, German airline Lufthansa turned over most of its short-haul flights that don't serve major hubs to its low-cost subsidiary, Germanwings, which charges for checked bags, seat assignments and food and drinks.
British Airways now offers airfares with or without baggage fees included.
"I think this is going to open the floodgates in the next few years for this to be a long-haul phenomenon," said Jay Sorensen, president of IdeaWorks
When flight attendants order travelers to shut off their electronic devices during takeoffs and landings, they disrupt a lot of valuable technological activity.
Well, maybe the activity is not so valuable, but there is a lot of it.
More than 105 million hours of activity on electronic devices are expected to be disrupted in 2013 by the Federal Aviation Administration's ban on using such devices during takeoffs and landings, according to a study by DePaul University's Chaddick Institute for Metropolitan Development.
The number of lost hours gaming or reading jumped from 51.7 million in 2010, according to the study, which is based on observations of nearly 1,700 passengers on 23 flights.
The study estimates that the use of electronic devices on planes is surging, with more than 35% of travelers using gadgets such as electronic tablets and smartphones at some point in a flight, up from 28% in 2012 and 17.6% in 2010.
The study concludes that the FAA ban on electronic devices during takeoffs and landings comes at a "high cost to the traveling public in regards to technology use."
It goes on to suggest that the FAA "follow an aggressive timetable for lifting the ban and allowing passengers more time to 'power up.' "
The FAA has already assembled a panel to consider lifting the ban on using e-readers, tablets and other devices on planes. 
Cellphone calls will be off the table. 
A report from the committee is expected to be released at the end of July.
With the ban still in place, AirTran Airways last week reported that its crews removed 100 high school students and eight chaperons from a flight from New York to Atlanta.
A spokeswoman for the airline, a subsidiary of Southwest Airlines, said the group was bumped because of "behavior and inability to comply with our flight attendants requests." One request they refused, the airline said, was to turn off their cellphones.


French central bank expects end of recession
The Bank of France has said it expects the eurozone's second biggest economy to return to growth in the second quarter, following six previous months of recession. 
But it added growth would be marginal.
The French economy looked set to expand by 0.1 percent in the second quarter, the country's central bank said in a report on Monday.
The Banque de France admitted the prospects for growth and more employment remained rather dim this year, but pointed to a pick-up in April. 
The Q2 outlook from the central bank corresponded with that of the national statistics institute, INSEE, which had also penciled in marginal growth for the period in question after two quarters with a 0.2-percent contraction.
The Bank of France noted it based its growth estimate on confidence in industry and the services sector, with recent surveys showing that business leaders expected activity to firm by June at the latest.
Election promises
Official data showed that output by French industry rallied sharply in April by 2.2 percent from the March level. 
The rebound was largely due to a stronger automotive sector, and important industry in the country which had been hit by weak demand from the debt-stricken euro area.
ING Bank Global Economics analyst Julien Manceaux said the April figures were gratifying, but he warned that the prospects for business as a whole were still rather shaky. 
"Any durable rebound is unlikely before the second half of the year, let alone a reversal of the unemployment trend," he commented.
Growth and related tax income are of critical importance for the Socialist-led government of President Francois Hollande, supported by the Greens, which had set out to boost industry and create more jobs.


German firms: Disadvantages in resource supplies
A renowned German think tank has found out that smaller companies in the country are especially concerned about future rare material supplies. 
They fear that delivery conditions might put them at a disadvantage.
A fresh study by the Cologne Institute for Economic Research (IW) showed Monday every second German industrial firm deplores disadvantages in raw material supplies vis-a-vis competitors from resource-rich nations.
A poll among 2,000 domestic companies revealed that the latter enjoyed more attractive purchase prices, fewer environmental regulations and a higher supply security.
"Every fifth company polled says this results in German firms' lower competitiveness," said IW chief Michael Hüther during a presentation of the study in Berlin.
Insufficient precautions
Steady access to raw materials – including metals like steel, copper and cobalt – were of the essence for Germany, which has to import almost all of the metals needed for industry, the survey pointed out.
Most raw materials were not imported to Germany directly, but rather indirectly through suppliers of intermediate products, the study maintained, which in term meant companies faced enormous difficulties when a major supplier dropped out of the delivery chain. 
But the institute warned that every 10th industrial company in Germany had not made any precautions for such a scenario, adding that among small and medium-sized firms only every fourth had a plan B in their drawers.
The Cologne-based think tank argued that policy makers had a pivotal role in ensuring future raw materials security through free-trade agreements to remove protectionism, export duties and other instruments hampering free markets. 
It said European nations should better coordinate their raw materials and energy policies to have more weight in international negotiations.
The German government has already started minimizing future supply risks by inking long-term raw material partnerships with Mongolia and Kazakhstan.


IEA: Carbon emissions from fuel usage hit new global record
The International Energy Agency (IEA) says the world's carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel usage have risen to a record level. 
It warns that despite increased renewables usage climate change will "not go away."
Global carbon dioxide emissions hit a new record in 2012, standing at 31.6 billion tons, the IEA reported Monday.
The agency said the energy sector accounts for about two-thirds of global emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases, which scientists say are fueling climate change.
The IEA report, presented in London, singles out China as the biggest polluter. 
Its emissions in 2012 rose 3.8 percent compared to the previous year.
While the Asian country spewed out 300 million tons last year, the gain was one of its lowest seen in decades, reflecting China's efforts to adopt renewable sources of energy and to improve efficiencies.
The IEA said the United States had reduced its year-on-year emissions by 200 million tons, or 3.8 percent, in part due to a switch in power generation from coal to gas. 
That switch brought the US back to levels last recorded in the mid-1990s.
Huge challenge
Emissions in Europe declined over the same period by 50 million tons, or 1.4 percent, because of the continent's protracted economic slowdown and in spite of an increased use of coal-fired power stations overall.
By contrast, Japan's carbon dioxide emissions jumped by 70 million tons in 2012 as endeavors to improve energy efficiency failed to offset its increasing use of fossil fuels in the wake of the Fukushima nuclear disaster in 2011.
Warming to exceed 2-degrees target
The IEA warned that the world was on a path to an average temperature rise of between 3.6 and 5.3 degrees Celsius - about double the target set at a UN summit in Durbin in 2010. 
Emissions in 2012 were projected to be nearly 4 billion tons higher than a level consistent with attaining the 2-degree target, the agency concluded.
"Climate change has quite frankly slipped to the back burner of policy priorities. But the problem is not going away - quite the opposite," said IEA Executive Director Maria van der Hoeven. 
"Much more can be done to tackle energy-sector emissions without jeopardising economic growth."
The report said emissions could be reduced significantly by 2020 by improving energy efficiency in buildings, industry and transport, limiting the use of coal-fired power plants, halving the oil and gas industry's release of methane, and phasing out fossil fuel subsidies.
Climate negotiators meeting since last week in Bonn, Germany, are debating the details of a proposed new global climate treaty that is supposed to be adopted by 2015. 
The main sticking point is how to divide the burden of emissions cuts between developed and developing countries.


CAPITOL BUSINESS BEAT
L.A.'s Latino senators divided on banning plastic bags
Other lawmakers, saying their priority is keeping jobs in their communities, vote it down on the Senate floor.
SACRAMENTO — Think Latino Democratic lawmakers from Los Angeles vote the same way on key bills?
Think again.
Case in point: the recent defeat of a plastic shopping bag ban.
The bill, by Sen. Alex Padilla (D-Pacoima), died after fellow Latinos voted it down on the Senate floor.
SB 405 would have prohibited supermarkets and superstores from handing out plastic bags after Jan. 1. 
Convenience stores and smaller outlets had a later deadline.
Padilla said that the bags cause litter, foul up sorting machines and harm wildlife. 
He had support from environmentalists, local governments and legislators from coastal areas.
Opponents — plastics companies, small businesses and senators from southeast Los Angeles County and Orange County — countered that a bag ban would kill jobs at a handful of California plastic bag manufacturers.
The legislation didn't take into consideration "those hard-working families that may not live on the coast, that may not live in Northern California," said Sen. Ricardo Lara (D-Bell Gardens). 
"They may live in communities like Cudahy, Bell Gardens, Lynwood, South Gate, Commerce and Montebello that depend on these jobs to feed their families."
Democratic Sens. Lou Correa of Santa Ana, Ron Calderon of Montebello, Norma Torres of Pomona and Kevin de Leon of Los Angeles made similar speeches.
Padilla, who represents the San Fernando Valley, bristled at the implication that he didn't care about working-class people.
"My district may not be Cudahy, but it's not that different," he said. 
"Believe me when I tell you the impact on working families, the working poor, the unemployed and the underemployed is not lost of me."
He accused his colleagues of voting for the status quo to help a few plastic-bag makers, which already are shifting production to reusable bags in response to local ordinances restricting single-use plastic bags.
The upshot, said Jaime Regalado, political science professor emeritus at Cal State Los Angeles: "There never was a solid, singular, homogenous block of Latino leaders or voters."
Snoopy plates
Californians can buy one of about a dozen special-interest license plates.
They can boost the arts, the coast, Lake Tahoe, Yosemite and the Olympics, among other causes.
If Assemblywoman Toni Atkins (D-San Diego) has her way, "Peanuts" comic fans could get Snoopy on their cars. 
Her bill, AB 482, passed the Assembly 57 to 19 and is in the Senate.
Revenue from the sale of the plates at $50 each would pay for improvements to museums and other cultural sites.
Safer drugs
Pharmacists put together different medicines, called compounded drugs, for patients who have specialized needs, such as liquefying some to make them easier to swallow. 
Such drugs are sold in bulk to hospitals and other healthcare organizations.
But the state pharmacy board has limited power to ensure that out-of-state pharmacies make safe drug compounds.
The problem turned deadly last year after a Massachusetts pharmacy sent contaminated steroid solution to 23 states, including California. 
In all, 39 people died, none in California.
Lawmakers are not taking any chances. 
The Assembly sent to the Senate a bill that would revoke the license of an out-of-state pharmacy to sell in California after it is linked to contaminated drugs. 
The bill also would require such a pharmacy to notify California officials quickly about recalls.
The bill, AB 1045, "would literally save lives," said its author, Assemblywoman Sharon Quirk-Silva (D-Fullerton).


McDonald's May sales rise 2.6 percent; shares up
(Reuters) - McDonald's Corp (MCD.N) said sales at its established restaurants around the world rose 2.6 percent in May as it expanded offerings for late-night breakfasts, tweaked other menus and benefited from advertising value-priced meals.
Analysts polled by Consensus Metrix had expected a 1.9 percent rise in global sales at restaurants open at least 13 months.
McDonald's shares rose 2 percent to $100.50 in premarket trading on Monday.
Sales at restaurants open at least 13 months rose 2.4 percent in the United States, while they rose 2 percent in Europe and 0.9 percent in the Asia/Pacific, Middle East and Africa (APMEA) region.
Analysts polled by Consensus Metrix expected comparable-restaurant sales to increase 2.1 percent in the United States, 1.2 percent in Europe and 1.5 percent in APMEA.
The overall global result was better compared with April, when same-restaurant sales slipped 0.6 percent.
During that month, an unexpected 0.7 percent gain in the United States was offset by a 2.4 percent fall in Europe and a 2.9 percent drop in the APMEA region.
Resurgent rivals like Burger King Worldwide (BKW.N) and Wendy's Co (WEN.O) have chipped away at McDonald's lead by rolling out a broad variety of special menus and value deals.
They have also copied its successful business strategies, ranging from restaurant renovations to extended hours.
McDonald's has countered by introducing new products such as chicken McWraps and egg white McMuffins. 
It is also expanding its test of a late-night breakfast menu and eliminating some items, including Angus burgers and its fruit & walnut salad.
McDonald's shares, which have risen 9 percent this year, closed at $98.28 on the New York Stock Exchange on Friday.


McDonald's comeback: Menu upgrade leads to strong May sales
For the first time in months, a key sales figure at McDonald’s rose in May as the world’s largest burger chain tried to stay ahead of competitors by sprucing up its menu.
Same-store sales were up 2.6% last month, beating out Wall Street’s predictions for a 1.9% upswing. 
The measure strips out volatility by only considering sales at locations open more than a year.
In the U.S., the gauge was up 2.4%, as customers embraced new menu items such as Chicken McWraps and health-focused Egg White Delight sandwiches.
The fast food giant has tried to upgrade its breakfast offerings, hoping to attract a growing segment of morning diners. 
The company recently said it would roll out dinner and breakfast options from midnight to 4 a.m.
Many other chains are doing the same. 
Taco Bell recently launched a breakfast waffle taco. 
Dunkin’ Donuts is now selling a breakfast sandwich featuring bacon and eggs sandwiched between two halves of a doughnut.
McDonald’s has struggled to turn in encouraging financial figures since October, when it reported its first monthly sales slide in nearly a decade.
In the ensuing months, the Oak Brook, Ill.-based chain has reported far more comparable sales declines than increases, including a 0.6% global slide in April.
Last month, the metric was up 2% in Europe, as strength in Russia and England tamped down difficulties in Germany and France.
But in Asia, same-store sales grew just 0.9%, disappointing analysts. 
McDonald’s blamed an avian flu outbreak for dampening traffic in China.
The company’s stock was up as much as 1.8% in morning trading to $100.13 a share. 
It has advanced 13% so far this year.


Mergers & Acquisitions
Report: Google outbids Facebook in race for Waze
US Internet company Google is in advanced talks to acquire Israel-based tech firm Waze, several newspapers have reported. 
Waze is a GPS navigation system for smart phones that was also in the focus of Facebook and Apple.
Internet search engine Google and Israeli company Waze were in negotiations to finalize a deal worth at least $1 billion (757 million euros), Israeli media reported Sunday.
The two companies had agreed terms and were about to sign for a price exceeding $1 billion, Haaretz daily newspaper wrote on its website. 
Business daily Globes said the purchase price was $1.3 billion, adding that Google outbid Apple and Facebook in the race to buy the GPS mobile navigation appfor smart phones manufactured by Waze.
The agreement called for Google to pay the full amount in cash, as well as keep Waze's research and development center in Israel for at least three years, Haaretz said without identifying its source.
"Waze will retain its independent identity both as a company and as a brand," the newspaper wrote, adding that Facebook had sought to include the company into its headquarters in California.
Waze has developed a smartphone navigation app, claiming it will allow users to share information on traffic jams, accidents and other traffic-related information in efforts to save time and gas money.
The company has about 100 employees in Israel and 47 million users of its navigation software.
Neither Google nor the Israeli company would confirm or comment on the deal, following requests by several news agencies.


Turkey's prime minister condemns anti-government protests
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan returns from a trip abroad to a nation in turmoil. 
He calls for an end to protests that began over an Istanbul development project.
ISTANBUL, Turkey —Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan returned to Turkey on Friday morning in a defiant mood, calling for an end to the anti-government protests that have rocked the nation during the last week.
In a speech from atop an open-air bus to thousands of supporters, Erdogan, back from a four-day trip to North Africa, said, "These protests must end immediately."
"No power but Allah can stop Turkey's rise," continued Erdogan during an address to the scores of Justice and Development Party faithful who had gathered at Istanbul Ataturk Airport, according to local news reports.
The speech largely scuttled hopes that Erdogan would strike a more conciliatory tone upon his return.
Tens of thousands of protesters have taken to the streets across Turkey over the last week after a bruising police crackdown on demonstrators rallying against plans to demolish Gezi Park, one of Istanbul's last major green spaces, to make way for a shopping mall and a replica of Ottoman-era barracks.
Erdogan later said the plans for the shopping center would be shelved, but authorities would press ahead with the rest of the project, including green space that he suggested would be "far better than the current park."
The protests quickly morphed into a broader display of discontent with Erdogan, whom the demonstrators — largely secular and middle-class youth — accuse of authoritarianism and political exclusion. 
They also believe Erdogan is pursuing an Islamist agenda.
"They say I am the prime minister of only 50%," Erdogan told his supporters, referring to the vote secured by his party in the 2011 general election. 
"It's not true. We have served the whole of the 76 million from the east to the west."
Deniz Halman, a student who stood in Gezi Park on Friday, was not impressed.
"People don't care about his speech," Halman said. 
"He's become a dictator. Other politicians are seeing this and saying to us, 'We have got your message.'"
Turkish President Abdullah Gul has spent much of the last four days doing damage control, widely interpreted as an effort to offset Erdogan's incendiary rhetoric regarding the protesters, whom he has characterized as hooligans and extremists "running wild."
"If there are objections, there is nothing more natural than voicing them," the Hurriyet Daily News quoted Gul as saying this week. 
"Everyone should show restraint. All the messages with good intentions were received, and what is necessary will be done."
Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arinc offered an apology Tuesday to the protesters assailed by police during the initial raid on Gezi Park. 
However, Erdogan on Friday said the "police are doing their duty."
"These protests, which have turned into vandalism and utter lawlessness, must end immediately," he said.
The redevelopment of the Taksim Square area is but one of a number of controversial projects pushed through by Erdogan and his Justice and Development Party, or AKP — a center-right party steeped in Islamic ideology — despite widespread opposition as Istanbul's green spaces diminish.
The recent destruction of an old and much-loved cinema to make way for a shopping mall also sparked outrage.
Erdogan reportedly is planning a third Istanbul airport and has announced plans for a mosque visible "from every corner of the Bosporus," adding to the 17,000 mosques that have been built during his decade in power.
Turkey's economy has grown rapidly during his tenure, driven by increased foreign investment and a focus on large-scale construction projects.


Beyond the riot zone: Why Taksim Square matters to Turks
(CNN) -- It's a congested, sprawling transport hub surrounded by 1950s architecture and predominantly used by commuters or tourists to cross the city of Istanbul.
But proposed changes to Taksim Square have seen it become the flashpoint for protests that have swept through Turkey in the past week, leaving thousands injured and focusing the world's attention on the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Taksim has been no stranger to violence. 
In 1977, at least 34 protesters died during May Day clashes with police. 
May 1 rallies in the square were banned in 1980 and were only allowed to legally resume in 2010. 
On May Day this year, there were riots after city authorities again refused to grant trade unions and youth groups permission to demonstrate in Taksim, blaming construction work being carried out in the square.
Professor Ersin Kalaycioglu, professor of political science at Istanbul's Sabanci University, said significantly, Taksim Square was also known as "republic square," because it was built by the Republic of Turkey's founding fathers to commemorate the war of liberation. 
"Taksim Square is connected to Istiklal Caddesi -- Independence Avenue -- and Cumhuriyet Caddesi -- the Avenue of the Republic. So there is a lot of symbolism that has to do with the Turkish Republic," he said.
The Turkish word "taksim" translates as "divide" and Kalaycioglu said Taksim Square was so-named because the area used to be the site of Istanbul's main reservoir, where the water was divided up.
In the 20th Century and earlier, the area was only partially inhabited, he said, housing a military barracks and military training ground and a cemetery running down the slopes and a military hospital that still remains.
"In the 1930s the cemetery was moved to another part of town and the area was opened up for apartment buildings -- and at one point it was one of the 'poshest' parts of the city," he said. 
"Most of the apartment buildings face the Bosphorus [the strait that connects the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara]," he said. 
"Because of its majestic view, [Taksim] is an attraction in its own right." 
It was estimated that millions of people went through the area to work every day, Kalaycioglu said.
Since the protests, however, Taksim has been blocked to traffic. 
This impromptu pedestrianization inadvertently reflects the authorities' plan to divert all traffic from the square. 
Kalaycioglu said plans to take the traffic underground included a pedestrian curb but after the tunnel was dug it was discovered that not enough room had been allowed for foot traffic. 
That was when the government decided to slice off part of Taksim's Gezi Park -- one of the last green spaces in Istanbul's center -- "which the ecologists and architects of the city started to argue against."
"When machines were sent in to take down the trees, the people who had been protesting there tried to stop them and a row intervened between the construction company and the protesters -- and police intervened," Kalaycioglu said.
But in an interview with CNN's Christiane Amanpour, Mevlut Cavusoglu, the deputy chairman of Erdogan's AK Party said the project for Taksim Square had enjoyed cross-party support. 
"This project was actually supported by all the political parties in the city council and it was adapted unanimously at the city council," Cavusoglu said. 
He added that the number of trees in the square would be increased by the project -- with plans to replant 10 of those being removed from Gezi Park.
Cavusoglu denied reports that a mall was part of the project. 
"The building of a shopping mall has never been considered here in Taksim Square. What is [being] considered is the pedestrian way and putting car traffic under the tunnel and enlarging Taksim Square," he said. 
"Only old military barracks is considered to rebuild. "
Turkey's Ottoman past
The barracks being reconstructed are from the 19th Century, a period when Turkey was still ruled by Ottoman sultans, who declared themselves the "caliphs" -- or spiritual leaders -- of the Muslim world. 
In 1922, first president of the Republic of Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, sent the last sultan into exile and two years later, banned the caliphate and declared Turkey a secular state -- so the ideals of the Republic of Turkey clash with those of the country's Ottoman past.
The plans to rebuild Ottoman-era barracks had raised two different issues -- the physical change and the idea behind it, said Benjamin Fortna, professor of Middle Eastern history at SOAS (School of Oriental and African Studies), University of London.
"The idea -- building a replica of a past building - probably suggests to some people that the government's trying to link itself to the Ottoman past. But of course the square does exist from the Ottoman period." 
Fortna said many people objected to a "kind of glorification" of the Ottoman era, which the early republic had tried to "ignore and denigrate."
Kalaycioglu said the barracks had also been associated with the massacre of Christian army officers during a major uprising against constitutional rule in 1909. 
"In the minds of the people, [the uprising] was the conspiracy of the sultan who tried to get rid of the officers in 1908 by using religious provocation," he said. 
"That left an indelible mark in the minds of the people that religion could be deployed as a major factor against modernization."
That concept was "at the very base" of Erdogan's AK Party, Kalaycioglu said. 
The plans for Taksim Square also including the building of a mosque, he said. 
This meant "anybody objecting to the project would be objecting to a mosque" and the AKP was presenting objectors as atheist, secular, communist, anti-democratic and anti the people, he said. 
"The masses on their side will be conservative and Sunni Muslim," he said.
The proposed mosque would also overshadow the statues of the major figures of the republic represented on the Monument to the Republic in Taksim Square, Kalaycioglu said.
Taksim's lack of religious connotations was "probably one of the reasons that it was favored by the republic as a modern urban space," Fortna said. 
The plan to build a mosque in Taksim was therefore "highly controversial and something that those with a secular orientation in the city and the country itself would resist," he said. 
"The other side would see it as a natural place to have a mosque."
The term "secular" -- most often understood in the West as referring to the separation of religion and government -- was often applied to Turkey, Fortna said. 
"But in Turkey itself they use the French term 'laïque.' In Turkey you really have the situation that's related to the founding of the republic - that the state will kind of control religion," Fortna said. 
"So, for example, the Directorate of Religious Affairs is responsible for deciding the text that Muslim clerics can deliver in their Friday sermons. "
Kalaycioglu said the government also planned to demolish the Ataturk Cultural Center. 
They [Erdogan's government] want to get rid of anything and everything to do with Ataturk," he said. 
Kalaycioglu suggested that another example of this was the government's proposal to close down Ataturk Airport -- Istanbul's main international hub -- and build a new airport in the north. 
He said this would involve excavating a new channel between the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara. 
"All this to get rid of the name of Ataturk. There's a lot of ideological baggage."
'Contested space'
Fortna said Taksim had long being a contested space and plans to change it would always be likely to cause controversy. 
"Because it's such a central location and because of its particular make-up and associations -- whatever happens there will probably be heavily scrutinized and criticized," he said.
"Taksim is a place where demonstrators habitually gather. There's always a May Day protest for example. It's a place where people would naturally gravitate -- it's one of the few places where there's a fairly large open space in the city," he said.
The current demonstrators have demanded Erdogan's resignation, accusing his government of creeping authoritarianism, while the prime minister has said the protests are part of an attempt by opponents who lost to his AK Party to beat it "by other means." "The issue of trees in Gezi Park thing is just the trigger," he said on Monday.
Kalaycioglu said the number of protesters had surged after evidence emerged of a brutal police response to the initial Taksim demonstration. 
He said the government had "started to argue that it was just a group of marauders" but that a huge majority seemed to be ordinary citizens, from all ages and walks of life and the government had eventually realized this and pulled the police out of the scene.
In his interview with Amanpour, Cavusoglu -- Erdogan's deputy -- acknowledged that police had been heavy-handed and said their actions would be investigated but insisted that the government represented the Turkish people. 
"At each election the people have been increasing their support for our government and our prime minister," he said. 
"We are the democratic government and democratically elected parliament."
But Kalaycioglu said the protests had spread spontaneously through Turkey, "motivated by the same theme." 
The government was "jumping on freedom of expression and freedom of the press," he said. 
"The big issue there is, is of course freedom of expression and to be treated as stakeholders -- not as cockroaches. More is at stake than just Taksim Square."


Turkish protesters defy warning, battle police in Taksim Square
Angered by what they see as Prime Minister Erdogan's heavy hand, ousted crowds spill into the streets, adding supporters as they fight to return to the square.
ISTANBUL, Turkey — Protesters defying a blunt warning from Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan engaged in running battles Tuesday with police who unleashed clouds of tear gas and blasts of water cannons in an effort to end nearly two weeks of protest.
After daylong street battles, protesters who were chased away in the early morning swarmed back into Istanbul's central Taksim Square, which has become a focus for grievances in a country long regarded as a model of democracy and economic growth in the Muslim world.
They were met with more tear gas and water cannons, a reflection of a sharp increase in confrontations after several days of relative calm. 
By late Tuesday neither side appeared to be backing down.
Protesters angered by what they regard as Erdogan's heavy hand spilled into surrounding streets and neighborhoods, adding supporters as they fought to get back to the square. 
Erdogan, who harshly criticized former Egyptian strongman Hosni Mubarak for his crackdown on "Arab Spring" protesters in 2011, appeared intent on making good on a warning that his patience was at an end.
"Erdogan is a foolish man," said protester Osman Soybir, a civil engineer wearing swimming goggles to protect himself from the tear gas wafting from the square.
"This is not just a disappointment, it's tragic. He has too much power and he showed us today he will use it," Soybir added before another volley of tear gas sent him sprinting down the street.
Istanbul's governor, Huseyin Mutlu, said the police operation would continue until the area was cleared of protesters.
"From this moment on, the unshakable power of our state and our nation will be shown on marginal groups by our police forces," Mutlu said at a news conference.
The unrest began as a peaceful sit-in to protest plans to destroy the adjoining Gezi Park to make way for redevelopment, but it quickly swelled into nationwide demonstrations when police attempted to clear the park of demonstrators. 
Violence has also flared in other cities, notably in Izmir and the capital, Ankara. 
At least three people have died, including a police officer, and thousands have been injured, according to a doctors union.
The protesters are made up mostly of middle-class youths largely unaffiliated with any political party. 
Instead, they represent a fiercely nationalistic and secular current and feel threatened by what they see as Erdogan's authoritarianism and the ruling party's increasing focus on Islamic strictures.
Some opposition leaders, however, have joined in condemning the police crackdown.
The government's response, instead of defusing the situation, is "creating the opposite effect," Faruk Logoglu, deputy chairman of the main opposition Republican People's Party, said in a telephone interview Tuesday night. 
"On one hand the government says … we respect your democratic rights — then they attack with full force."
Erdogan, who has won three consecutive elections, has dismissed the protesters as hooligans and extremists and rejected comparisons to the Arab Spring uprisings.
Turkey's thriving multiparty democracy and vibrant economy bear little resemblance to the autocracies that ruled Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and Yemen or the current government in Syria. 
Although Erdogan may have underestimated the resolve of the protesters, he retains considerable support.
"To those who … are at Taksim and elsewhere taking part in the demonstrations with sincere feelings, I call on you to leave those places and to end these incidents, and I send you my love," Erdogan said in a televised address to members of parliament from his Justice and Development Party in Ankara.
"But for those who want to continue with the incidents I say: 'It's over.' As of now we have no tolerance for them," Erdogan was quoted as saying by the Associated Press. 
"Not only will we end the actions, we will be at the necks of the provocateurs and terrorists, and no one will get away with it."
Tuesday's violence began with a dawn raid at the square, which has seen demonstrators numbering in the tens of thousands in recent days, although just a few hundred were camped out overnight. 
Hundreds of police officers backed by armored vehicles overran improvised barricades and moved into the area, tearing down posters and banners that festooned the square.
A small group of protesters — scarves wrapped around their heads — hurled Molotov cocktails and aimed fireworks at police positioned under a revered statue in the center of Taksim Square. 
Others set a vehicle ablaze, sending plumes of smoke into the sky.
Control of the square appeared to change hands several times during the day. 
Just before the police, who had pulled back in the early evening, launched dozens of tear-gas shells about 8:30 p.m., there was a festive air among the swelling crowds of demonstrators returning to the embattled area. 
They danced, waved banners and chanted "Erdogan resign."
The tear gas sent a wave of panic through the crowd. 
Protesters ran through side streets and into cafes. 
Inside one restaurant on Istiklal Street, activists handed out lemons to combat the effects of the gas, and diners offered their drinks to the dozens crammed inside.
"We are seeing lots of injuries, mostly from head trauma, a lot of people gagging from tear gas," said a volunteer at a makeshift field hospital that was aiding protesters near Gezi Park. 
She asked to be identified only as Gizem P.
Officials initially said Tuesday morning's raid was to remove posters from the statue in Taksim Square and the nearby Ataturk Cultural Center and would not affect demonstrators assembled in Gezi Park. 
However, Interior Minister Muammer Guler later said the "intervention took place to normalize life" at the square, state media reported. 
At one point, police began marching toward the park but retreated after a brief confrontation with protesters, witnesses said.
"It was provocation," said one protester, who gave her name as Deniz A., standing in Gezi Park as tear gas hung in the air. 
"They want clashes with us, then they can portray us as the aggressors."
Erdogan defended the police operation, according to local news reports. 
"What were we supposed to do? Kneel in front of these people and ask them to remove the banners? How would those illegal rags be removed from public buildings?"
Tuesday's raid came despite reports that negotiations between the ruling Justice and Development Party and the Gezi Park movement were set to commence. 
Erdogan was expected to meet with representatives of the protesters Wednesday, though it was unclear after the nighttime clashes if the session would still be held.


Turkey's prime minister condemns anti-government protests
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan returns from a trip abroad to a nation in turmoil. 
He calls for an end to protests that began over an Istanbul development project.
ISTANBUL, Turkey —Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan returned to Turkey on Friday morning in a defiant mood, calling for an end to the anti-government protests that have rocked the nation during the last week.
In a speech from atop an open-air bus to thousands of supporters, Erdogan, back from a four-day trip to North Africa, said, "These protests must end immediately."
"No power but Allah can stop Turkey's rise," continued Erdogan during an address to the scores of Justice and Development Party faithful who had gathered at Istanbul Ataturk Airport, according to local news reports.
The speech largely scuttled hopes that Erdogan would strike a more conciliatory tone upon his return.
Tens of thousands of protesters have taken to the streets across Turkey over the last week after a bruising police crackdown on demonstrators rallying against plans to demolish Gezi Park, one of Istanbul's last major green spaces, to make way for a shopping mall and a replica of Ottoman-era barracks.
Erdogan later said the plans for the shopping center would be shelved, but authorities would press ahead with the rest of the project, including green space that he suggested would be "far better than the current park."
The protests quickly morphed into a broader display of discontent with Erdogan, whom the demonstrators — largely secular and middle-class youth — accuse of authoritarianism and political exclusion. 
They also believe Erdogan is pursuing an Islamist agenda.
"They say I am the prime minister of only 50%," Erdogan told his supporters, referring to the vote secured by his party in the 2011 general election. 
"It's not true. We have served the whole of the 76 million from the east to the west."
Deniz Halman, a student who stood in Gezi Park on Friday, was not impressed.
"People don't care about his speech," Halman said. 
"He's become a dictator. Other politicians are seeing this and saying to us, 'We have got your message.'"
Turkish President Abdullah Gul has spent much of the last four days doing damage control, widely interpreted as an effort to offset Erdogan's incendiary rhetoric regarding the protesters, whom he has characterized as hooligans and extremists "running wild."
"If there are objections, there is nothing more natural than voicing them," the Hurriyet Daily News quoted Gul as saying this week. 
"Everyone should show restraint. All the messages with good intentions were received, and what is necessary will be done."
Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arinc offered an apology Tuesday to the protesters assailed by police during the initial raid on Gezi Park. 
However, Erdogan on Friday said the "police are doing their duty."
"These protests, which have turned into vandalism and utter lawlessness, must end immediately," he said.
The redevelopment of the Taksim Square area is but one of a number of controversial projects pushed through by Erdogan and his Justice and Development Party, or AKP — a center-right party steeped in Islamic ideology — despite widespread opposition as Istanbul's green spaces diminish.
The recent destruction of an old and much-loved cinema to make way for a shopping mall also sparked outrage.
Erdogan reportedly is planning a third Istanbul airport and has announced plans for a mosque visible "from every corner of the Bosporus," adding to the 17,000 mosques that have been built during his decade in power.
Turkey's economy has grown rapidly during his tenure, driven by increased foreign investment and a focus on large-scale construction projects.


Prosecutors call for Strauss-Kahn pimping charges to be dropped
(CNN) -- French prosecutors in Lille asked Tuesday for charges to be dropped against former IMF chief Dominique Strauss-Kahn over his alleged participation in a prostitution ring, citing a lack of evidence.
Strauss-Kahn was among a number charged with aggravated pimping in an investigation into sex parties at the Hotel Carlton in the northern city of Lille.
He did not deny attending the parties, his lawyers said, but he did not know that the young women at the parties were being paid for sex. 
The case is known in France as the "Carlton affair."
A judge will decide whether to act on the recommendations of the office of the Lille prosecutor.
The prosecutor also asked for charges to be dropped against a second man accused in the case, Jean-Luc Vergin, also on the grounds of insufficient evidence.
However, 12 people should be called before the correctional tribunal for acts that will likely be qualified as aggravated pimping, and for a few of them, fraud, abuse of trust and abuse of public funds, a statement from the prosecutor's office said.
Investigating judges filed their 6,800-page dossier with the prosecutor's office in March this year, two years after the investigation was opened by the Lille courthouse into aggravated pimping charges.
Allegations denied
Strauss-Khan, a 64-year-old economist, was widely expected to become the Socialist presidential candidate -- until his professional career imploded with an arrest in New York in May 2011.
A New York hotel housekeeper, Nafissatou Diallo, told police that a naked Strauss-Kahn emerged from a room of his spacious luxury hotel suite and tried to force himself on her, at one point dragging her into the bathroom and trying to remove her underwear.
Strauss-Kahn alleged the encounter was consensual, but stepped down from his $500,000 job at the IMF.
A grand jury indicted him on seven counts, including sexual abuse and attempted rape, but prosecutors later dropped the charges after concluding Diallo had lied about some details of the alleged attack -- despite forensic evidence that showed a sexual encounter had occurred.
Diallo then sued Strauss-Kahn. 
The two sides reached a settlement late last year, the details of which have not been disclosed.
Last October, a French prosecutor dropped an investigation connecting Strauss-Kahn to a possible gang rape in Washington. 
The young Belgian woman whose testimony was the basis for the inquiry withdrew her previous statement and said she would not press charges, leaving the investigation with no grounds to continue, officials said.
Strauss-Kahn also faced allegations of attempted rape in 2003 against a young French writer, Tristane Banon. 
But prosecutors said the case could not be pursued because of a statute of limitations.
Strauss-Kahn denied the allegations and has since filed a countersuit in France, alleging slander.


Greece suspends state broadcaster ERT to save money
The Greek government has shut down the public broadcaster ERT, calling it a "haven of waste".
Viewers watching the news on the main TV channel saw the screens go to black late on Tuesday evening.
All employees have been suspended pending a re-organisation. 
Thousands of people held a protest against the decision outside ERT headquarters.
It is the latest move in rafts of spending cuts and tax rises aimed at leading the country out of recession.
"ERT is a case of an exceptional lack of transparency and incredible extravagance. This ends now," government spokesman Simos Kedikoglou said earlier.
While all 2,500 employees would be sacked, he added they would be paid compensation and would be able to apply for work when the corporation relaunches as a smaller, independent public broadcaster.
The head of ERT's foreign desk, Odin Linardatou, said the announcement had taken journalists by surprise.
"We are very shocked, we are angry," she told the BBC's Newshour programme. 
"What I cannot accept in a democracy is that Greece will not have a public broadcaster."
Riot police have been deployed in Athens as thousands of people have gathered outside ERT's headquarters to protest against the decision.
Journalists strike
Authorities confirmed that the Hellenic Broadcasting Corporation (ERT) had been formally disbanded, as some transmissions stopped on Tuesday night.
However, shortwave and internet broadcasts from ERT remain on air.
"This is a blow to democracy," said ERT newsreader Antonis Alafogiorgos at the end of the main TV station's final broadcast.
The Athens Journalists' Union has called a 48-hour strike to protest against the closure.
ERT employee Vayia Valavaki said the government was trying to "scare" people.
"I am now a laid-off single mother with a young child," she said. 
"How exactly is this country protecting me? Why are they leaving me without work?"
ERT, which began broadcasting in 1938, is funded by a direct payment of 4.30 euros (£3.80; $6) added monthly to electricity bills.
It ran three domestic TV channels, four national radio stations, as well regional radio stations and an external service, Voice of Greece.
In April, parliament passed a bill which would see 15,000 state employees lose their jobs by the end of next year.
The law was a condition for Greece to receive its next tranche of international loans worth 8.8bn euros (£7.4bn; $11.4bn).
Since 2010, the European Union and the IMF have promised more than 200bn euros in lending for Greece, the first country to be hit by the eurozone crisis.
The government has imposed tough austerity measures in return for aid, including cuts in pay and pensions leading to numerous general strikes.


Greek ambassador: Lessons from Olympics can help solve financial crisis
Leading Women connects you to extraordinary women of our time -- remarkable professionals who have made it to the top in all areas of business, the arts, sport, culture, science and more.
(CNN) -- When Athens was behind schedule in delivering the 2004 Olympic Games, the Greek government called Gianna Angelopoulos to take charge.
Angelopoulos had already successfully led the bid committee that saw Athens awarded the 2004 Olympic Games. 
When she received the appointment in 2000 to become president of the organizing committee, she had just four years instead of the usual seven, to deliver a successful Games.
She was the first female president of both a bid committee and an organizing committee for an Olympic Games
"We were the miracle, we showed a different Greece, a can-do Greece in four years instead of seven," she says.
Now Angelopoulos, who was named an ambassador at large by the Greek government, has written a book entitled, "My Greek Drama". 
The personal memoir captures her experience of running the Games along with an assessment of the country's financial crisis.
In an interview with CNN, she says Greece should use lessons learned during the Olympics to turn around its fortunes during its current economic crisis, which has seen 64% youth unemployment, a bailout from the European Union and a crippling austerity drive.
"It's not by chance that the crisis came," she says. 
"Politicians like to blame each other. They should have a lesson of how Greece performed during the Olympics."
With the Greek economy in its sixth year of recession, Angelopoulos isn't just critical of how the government is handling the crisis -- she's also concerned about Greece's reputation overseas.
"The image of Greece around the world is that it's in crisis and Greeks are lazy and never perform. What I know about Greece is we created a miracle in the making of the Olympics."
"The Greece I know is so different from the Greece I see now. All this achievement was dropped, the politicians dropped it."
Angelopoulos, 57, who grew up in the island of Crete, trained as a lawyer and served two terms in Greek parliament.
With her direct manner, she has won both friends and enemies among her fellow Greeks.
In 1996, with Greeks still wounded from losing out to Atlanta 1996 for the centenary of the modern Olympic Games, Angelopoulos was asked by the prime minister to lead the bid for Athens to be host city in 2004.
After a successful bid, Angelopoulos was initially excluded from organizing the Games themselves, but was called back in 2000 when progress was stalling and the International Olympic Committee was beginning to question whether Athens could deliver on time.
Although questions continued to be asked about Greece's readiness, Jacques Rogge, president of the International Olympic Committee, eventually described Athens 2004 as "unforgettable, dream Games".
"It's a woman's dream to achieve something unique and monumental for our country, and shows that women can do whatever they want," says Angelopoulos.
"We can break the glass ceiling and show that there's no such thing as mission impossible."
"I want this book to show about the effort and struggle that every woman and every young person can do to pursue his or her dream."
In preparation for the Olympic Games, Athens built numerous infrastructure projects, from a new airport and new tram line to renewed public spaces and state-of-the-art sports facilities.
However, Angelopoulos says not enough was done to plan for the legacy, and many of the facilities went to waste.
"I'm saddened to see that state-of-the-art facilities are abandoned, empty, closed," she says.
"If people ask me about organizing a Games, I would say 'plan for the day after, not just for the Olympics'. The excellent facilities can really make a difference for the day after."
She adds: "I went to successive governments and I urged them to show me a plan for the day after."
"They just told me 'you do your job, we have everything in hand'. They did nothing and lost the readiness of people to do things differently, to show the world a different Greece."
As well as the facilities lying empty, Angelopoulos says a return to the public spirit, which was evident during the Games, would help Greece through its current crisis.
"An Olympic Games is a unique opportunity to get citizens engaged with a noble cause," she says. 
"We had no tradition of volunteering in Greece, but we got 165,000 wanting to help. It was like an army, but it was lost."
"Through this tough time for Greece, people are selling their houses, selling their cars, taking their children out of university. Imagine if this volunteer spirit and way of helping people was still in place? Things would be different."
"This kind of common spirit is needed in a country, not just in good times."
Since the Olympic Games, Angelopoulos has become active with the Clinton Global Foundation and Harvard's John F. Kennedy School of Government, running a project which asks global leaders to share their experience with students.
"After my disappointment about how the politicians let down people I turned to the international stage and that's why I participated in the Clinton Global Initiative," she says.
After her years out of the spotlight, Angelopoulos is embarking on a lecture tour in the United States, publicizing "My Greek Drama" and sharing her dream that Greece can soon be a proud nation once more.
"Even if there's a lot of drama in my book, I believe there's a better chapter ahead. We can be the authors of our own story," she says.


Turkish leader set to meet with protesters after day of clashes, chaos
Istanbul (CNN) -- They've faced off with police on the streets of Istanbul, breathed in tear gas, braved water cannons, and hoped and prayed the protest camp they set up in a downtown park won't be overtaken.
On Wednesday, some of their leaders are set to sit down face to face with the man they railed against as being too stubborn, too heavy-handed, too dictatorial: Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
What began in late May as a demonstration focused on the environment -- opposition to a plan to build a mall in Istanbul's Gezi Park -- has evolved into a crusade against Erdogan that's spread around the country.
The official response has fanned the fury of protesters. 
Many of them are young professionals who considered themselves apolitical but now feel moved to action given what they see as an unnecessarily harsh, obstinate government.
"We want to be heard, respected ..." a woman in Gezi Park told CNN's Arwa Damon on Tuesday night. 
"We're not vandals, we're not criminals."
But while Erdogan promised to hear from some of them Wednesday, whether he'll act differently is another matter entirely.
In remarks Tuesday during a meeting of members of his own Justice and Development Party, the prime minister insisted, "We will never allow people to push things to us." 
And at one point, he directly addressed those in Taksim Square and in other cities around Turkey, including Ankara, the capital.
"They say the prime minister is harsh. The prime minister is firm," he said, addressing his detractors. 
"I'm sorry. The prime minister is not going to change."
And he intends to show that there are multitudes in the country who support him.
Next weekend, Erdogan's religious, conservative Justice and Development Party will stage rallies in his support. 
One begins Saturday evening in Ankara, while another is planned in Istanbul late Sunday.
Chaotic chorus of tear gas, fireworks, stun grenades
From Tuesday morning into the wee hours of Wednesday, police punctuated the air around Taksim Square and the adjacent Gezi Park with tear gas, water cannons and stun grenades. 
Protesters added to the unsettling, chaotic chorus with fireworks, metal banging and defiant chants.
The effort began with the arrival of armored vehicles to shove away makeshift barriers.
Several protesters linked arms to form a human chain and prevent the police advance. 
But when police deployed canisters of tear gas, they scattered.
"If you stop throwing rocks, we will not use tear gas," the police told the raucous group over loudspeakers. 
"We don't want you to get hurt; please obey."
In a game of cat-and-mouse, demonstrators -- some using wooden boards as shields -- would pull back only to return to spots in and around Taksim Square, lobbing Molotov cocktails and firecrackers and flashing "victory" signs.
The situation escalated that evening, as tens of thousands fled after riot police stepped up their dispersal of tear gas canisters toward the square.
But they didn't stay away for long. 
Instead, thousands packed back into the square. 
Some surrounded a large bonfire they fueled with whatever they could find, as deafening bangs -- likely the result of stun grenades -- added to the turmoil.
Time and again, there was a stretch of calm as the situation appeared to settle down, then a new flare-up.
It happened right after midnight, for instance, when government forces shot water cannons and tear gas toward the park and streets adjacent to the square.
Again, two hours later, a fresh wave of tear gas engulfed Gezi Park -- where government officials have said protesters can stay -- as a column of police broke through barricades on a side street nearby. 
The scene was frenzied with sirens blaring, people running, some even writhing in pain.
'This is how a violent person behaves'
It's not just Istanbul.
Police in Ankara fired tear gas overnight Tuesday toward apparent protesters, as armored vehicles cleared makeshift barricades along the street, video from CNN Turk showed.
The approach Tuesday marked an apparent return to the more heavy-handed tactics Turkish authorities used in the early days of the protests.
Two protesters have been killed since the demonstrations began in late May. 
One was hit by a car in Istanbul; the other was shot in the head by unknown assailants in Antakya, near the Syrian border. 
Plus, a police captain died after falling from a bridge, according to the Adana governor's office.
The Turkish Medical Association said that more than 4,300 people were injured in clashes last week, a few dozen of them seriously.
The woman who spoke to CNN on Tuesday night from Gezi Park said that she's seen classmates, work colleagues and others who, like her, had never protested until now. 
She said many have been angered and energized by the government's response.
Pointing to a mask she had around her neck to protect against tear gas, she added, "This is how a violent person behaves."
Ibrahim Kalin, Erdogan's chief adviser, said the government is simply do what it can to maintain order after "very marginal" and, in some cases, "very illegal groups ... have tried to dominate the scene and occupy Taksim Square."
Another Erdogan ally, parliamentarian Saban Disli, went even further in saying "peaceful demonstrators ... are being used by terrorist groups" and blaming opposition parties and "the international media" of crafting a false image of the prime minister.
Anyone who thinks that Erdogan, a former mayor of Istanbul, has changed since becoming prime minister and will bend in the face of the protests is mistaken, Disli told CNN's Christiane Amanpour on Tuesday night.
"This is not new Erdogan," he said.
New challenge for Erdogan after decade in power
Kalin defended the police response, saying they acted like those authorities who faced mass protests in places like Spain, Greece and during the Occupy Wall Street movement in New York and elsewhere.
Still, the volatile situation threatens to hurt not only Turkey's image but also its economy and its standing in the world.
Bordering Syria, Iraq and Iran, Turkey a NATO member and a key U.S. ally. 
Yet recent events have caused "concern" in the United States, according to U.S. National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden.
"We are concerned by any attempts to punish individuals for exercising their right to free speech, as well as attempts by any party to provoke violence," Hayden said. 
"We believe today's events reinforce the need to resolve this situation through dialogue."
Whatever one's take on Erdogan -- as a forward-looking statesman who has fueled Turkey's rise or an authoritarian leader who has expanded his power without listening to all people -- the prime minister is clearly in an unprecedented position after more than a decade in power.
In speeches, Erdogan has said he has no tolerance for what he calls illegal demonstrations, slamming protesters and warning that "even patience has an end."
"All they do is destroy. They attacked public buildings; they burned public buildings. They burned the cars of civilians," he said.
"Let's face off at the ballot box in seven months. If you are saying democracy and freedom, if you are saying rights and freedoms, you cannot achieve that with violence. Only within the laws, you can achieve it."
While few doubt Erdogan was legitimately elected, the unrest highlights the fact that he's not universally loved by Turks, despite the strong performance of the nation's economy during his years as prime minister.
"It is ... a democracy that is seeing deep splits between the one half that has voted for the governing party, and one half that does not," said Soner Cagaptay from the Washington Institute, a think tank focused on the Middle East and the United States. 
"Despite its economic growth, (Turkey) is, politically, very deeply polarized."


Turkey protests: Uneasy calm in Istanbul's Taksim Square
There is an uneasy calm in central Istanbul after an night of clashes which saw Turkish riot police disperse anti-government demonstrators.
The protesters had gathered on Taksim Square after a day of sporadic clashes.
Many have regrouped in nearby Gezi Park, whose proposed redevelopment sparked the protests which have widened into nationwide anti-government unrest.
The prime minister has said there will be no tolerance of people he accuses of seeking to harm Turkey.
The demonstrators accuse Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of becoming increasingly authoritarian and trying to impose conservative Islamic values on a secular state.
Mr Erdogan is due to meet a group of people - including an actress, a singer and a writer - who he hopes can mediate with the protesters.
It had been suggested he would hold talks with protest organisers, but they told the BBC that they had not been approached by the prime minister - and would refuse to meet him even if they were.
They added that they did not recognise any of the group that Mr Erdogan was due to meet as representatives of the protesters in the park.
Thousands converged on the square as night fell on Tuesday and were repelled by water cannon, rubber bullets and tear gas.
Many peaceful demonstrators were also caught in the clashes, and volunteers set up makeshift clinics to treat anyone injured.
Many of the dispersed demonstrators sought shelter in nearby areas, including Gezi Park. 
Police said they did not plan to enter the park.
Throughout Tuesday, riot police repeatedly clashed with protesters throwing bottles, stones and firebombs.
Security forces cleared the square, only for the demonstrators to return.
Istanbul Governor Huseyin Avni Mutlu had earlier struck a conciliatory note, but he went on television on Tuesday night to declare: "We will continue our measures in an unremitting manner, whether day or night, until marginal elements are cleared and the square is open to the people."
'It's over'
Mr Erdogan has defended the police action, saying that an environmental movement has been hijacked.
In a televised speech, he said: "To those who... are at Taksim and elsewhere taking part in the demonstrations with sincere feelings: I call on you to leave those places and to end these incidents and I send you my love.
"But for those who want to continue with the incidents I say: 'It's over.'
"As of now we have no tolerance for them."
Jeremy Bowen saw the protesters clash with police
The protests began on 31 May.
The Turkish Human Rights Foundation says four people have been killed, including one policeman.
Some 5,000 protesters have been treated for injuries or the effects of tear gas, while officials say 600 police officers have also been injured.
Protests have also occurred in the capital, Ankara, with smaller demonstrations in many other cities.
Police in Ankara have used water cannon and tear gas to break up demonstrations almost every night.
The United States, a key ally of Turkey, has expressed concern about events and urged dialogue between government and protesters.
"We believe that Turkey's long-term stability, security and prosperity is best guaranteed by upholding the fundamental freedoms of expression, assembly and association, and a free independent media," White House spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden said.


Arrests made in London ahead of next week's G8 summit
London (CNN) -- At least 57 people were arrested in London on Tuesday in connection with plans for anti-capitalist demonstrations before next week's Group of Eight summit, police in Britain said.
Those arrested were accused of possession of weapons with the intent to cause violent disorder, possession of pointed/bladed articles and a variety of public order offenses. 
Earlier, police in riot gear raided a building in central London.
Britain is hosting the G8 world leaders at a summit next week in Northern Ireland. 
A "Carnival Against Capitalism" has been planned by demonstrators ahead of the summit.
Demonstrators long have targeted the G8 summit to protest the economic policies of the world's leading industrial powers. 
The group is made up of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The Carnival Against Capitalism group said it hasn't negotiated with police and stressed that it won't be controlled. 
It planned a "mass action" of protests for central London on Tuesday afternoon.
"London is right at the heart of global capitalism," the Carnival group said on its website. 
"The powerful feel safe in London so long as they go unchallenged."
"Traditionally, carnival is the time where the people take over the streets, the bosses run and hide, and the world gets turned upside down. It is a time to celebrate our resistance and our dreams, to bring music and colour to the streets. And also to show our strength and our anger."
The group said in a statement that the mass actions "will only be as effective as the people participating in them."
"We have not negotiated with the police and we will not be controlled. If we look after each other, stay mobile, don't get caught in kettles and are ready to make quick decisions about what to do next, we can make the most of the day. See you on the streets," the group said.
The London Metropolitan Police says it has "an appropriate police plan in place." 
There were nearly 1,200 officers on duty as part of Tuesday's policing operation around the G8 summit.


E.U. Official Pushes U.S. to Explain Its Surveillance
BRUSSELS — Amid a growing outcry over American snooping on foreigners that threatens to cloud European-U.S. trade talks and President Barack Obama’s visit to Berlin, the European Union’s top justice official has demanded in unusually sharp terms that the United States reveal what its intelligence is doing with personal information of Europeans gathered under the Prism surveillance program revealed last week. 
Viviane Reding, the Union’s combative commissioner of justice, told Attorney General Eric Holder in a letter sent on Monday evening that individual citizens of European countries had the right to know whether their personal information had been part of intelligence gathering “on a large scale.”
In the letter, seen Tuesday by the International Herald Tribune, she also asked what avenues were available to Europeans to find out whether they had been spied on, and whether they would be treated similarly to U.S. citizens in such cases.
“Given the gravity of the situation and the serious concerns expressed in public opinion on this side of the Atlantic, you will understand that I will expect swift and concrete answers,” Mrs. Reding wrote.
Speaking for a continent where snooping carries ghastly echoes of fascist or communist regimes, Mrs. Reding challenged Mr. Holder to answer a list of detailed questions by Friday, when they are expected to speak face-to-face in Dublin at a ministerial meeting scheduled before the Prism spy operation came to light.
In Berlin, where Mr. Obama will speak next week before the Brandenburg Gate, privacy is a highly sensitive political issue and the Prism revelations have stirred a furor.
“You can be sure that this will be one of the things the chancellor addresses when President Obama is in Germany,” said Steffen Seibert, spokesman for Angela Merkel, who grew up in the former Communist East.
Germany’s interior minister, Hans-Peter Friedrich, said his ministry wants to establish whether any Germans’ right to privacy had been infringed and is preparing a “catalog of questions” for its American counterparts.
The justice minister, Sabine Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger, in a guest editorial for the Web site Spiegel Online, called the revelations about the U.S. surveillance “deeply disconcerting” and possibly “dangerous.”
“In a democratic constitutional state, security is not an end in itself, but serves to secure freedom,” Ms. Leutheusser-Schnarrenberger wrote.
Mrs. Reding — who has irked U.S. authorities in the past by threatening companies like Google for overstepping E.U. privacy standards — suggested Mr. Holder’s responses could shape the outcome of important trans-Atlantic initiatives like trade talks.
Europe has been a frequent critic of the United States in recent years for jeopardizing individual liberties by filtering vast volumes of information on European bank transfers and in airline passenger records to fight terror plots.
Mrs. Reding’s letter is another sign that the growth of government surveillance that began under the Bush administration after Sept. 11, 2001, and has expanded under the Obama administration, continues to touch raw nerves far beyond the United States.
Under the Prism program, the United States is said to have collected Internet data on foreigners abroad from companies including Google, Facebook, Microsoft, Apple, Yahoo and Skype.
The revelations have prompted members of the European Parliament, a directly elected body of representatives from across the Union that meets in Brussels and Strasbourg, to demand that data protection be included in upcoming U.S.-European talks on a long sought trade pact.
Any “trade pact will have to fully ensure the highest standards of data privacy for all citizens,” and an ongoing reform of Europe’s data protection law “must guarantee these standards for E.U. citizens when using U.S.-based Internet companies,” Hannes Swoboda, an Austrian member of the parliament who is president of the Socialists & Democrats group, said in a statement on Tuesday.
“It is no good the E.U. having strict regulation on data protection if those standards are not guaranteed when using U.S.-based Internet companies,” he said.
Talks on a trade deal were endorsed by Mr. Obama in February and involve efforts to drop trade barriers between the E.U. and the United States and to synchronize regulations. 
The talks are expected to be conducted by Mrs. Reding's colleague, Karel De Gucht, the E.U. trade commissioner — but the Parliament would have a final say over any such deal under its right, in force since 2009, to veto treaties with third countries. 
In the strongest demonstration against U.S. policy, the Parliament in 2010 blocked an agreement allowing U.S. authorities access to European banking data from a cooperative responsible for routing trillions of dollars daily among banks, brokerage houses, stock exchanges and other institutions.
The cooperative, the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, or Swift, is based near Brussels. 
It provided the U.S. authorities with personal data after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
The Parliament eventually gave its approval to a revised agreement in July 2010. But some lawmakers have threatened to renew demands to scrap that agreement, and others, with the United States.
In a thinly veiled warning to Mr. Holder about the trade pact, Ms. Reding said relations between the United States and Europe could be undermined by concerns about privacy, which many in Europe regard as an inviolable right.
In her letter, Mrs. Reding said she “is accountable before the European Parliament, which is likely to assess the overall trans-Atlantic relationship also in the light of your responses.”
In nine detailed questions, Ms. Reding asked Mr. Holder how much data-sifting the United States is conducting, whether those activities target individuals, and whether the surveillance involves issues beyond national security.
Mrs. Reding also pushed Mr. Holder to tell her “what avenues” are available to citizens of countries in the European Union to obtain information about whether their personal information has been examined under the Prism program and other programs, and whether Europeans have similar access to that information as Americans.
E.U. officials said Tuesday that the outcry over Prism will reinforce anxiety about how personal data is used.
On Tuesday, the president of Italy’s privacy authority, Antonello Soro, warned against the growing pressure from police and national authorities all over the world to obtain citizens’ private information. 
“The generalized and indiscriminate surveillance of citizens, reasonably also European citizens, beyond any criminal evidence, through data coming from phone calls or from the Web, is a very, very serious thing” he wrote to the Italian Parliament.
For Mrs. Reding, the chance to push back against Washington is a welcome opportunity.
Two years ago, she was forced to soften her initial proposals for data privacy rules in order to accommodate U.S. intelligence gathering. 
That followed intense pressure on the European Commission, the E.U.’s governing body, from the Obama administration.
Under Mrs. Reding's original proposal, companies in Europe that store or process personal data would need authorization from a “supervisory authority” before they could transfer personal information outside the Union at the request of a foreign government or court.
That article is no longer in the latest draft of Europe’s data privacy laws but, even before the furor erupted over Prism, some members of the European Parliament were asking for similar safeguards to be reintroduced. 


Greece pulls plug on state broadcaster
(CNN) -- In a budget-cutting move, the Greek government closed, at least temporarily, state broadcaster ERT.
Government spokesperson Simon Kedikoglou cited chronic corruption and mismanagement of funds as reasons for the closure.
"At a time when the Greek people are enduring sacrifices, there is no room for delay, hesitation or tolerance for sacred cows," Kedikoglou said in announcement shown on the broadcaster.
At least several of ERT's three TV channels and radio services went off the air early Wednesday. 
Television viewers saw screens go black.
ERT has said the decision means 2,656 employees will lose their jobs. 
In order to meet its commitments to its creditors, the Greek government has to dismiss 2,000 people from the wider public sector by the end of the year and 15,000 by the end of 2014.
The new television and radio broadcaster will open with a much smaller staff, Kedikoglou said. 
A "modern television and radio broadcaster will be established that will operate as soon as possible," he said.
Existing employees will be able to apply for new positions. 
A time frame for the new organization has not been announced.
Hundreds of employees gathered outside the ERT Athens headquarters to protest the move. 
Unions say they will fight the decision.


Past and future collide in Turkey clashes
(CNN) -- In 2012, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan defended the highly divisive renovation of Taksim Square in central Istanbul by invoking history. 
Referring to the plan to build a replica of a monumental 19th century Ottoman army barracks that once stood there, he said: "We are working to bring back history that has been destroyed. 
...We will unite Taksim with its history."
As it turned out, Erdoğan's attempt to unite Taksim with its history has revealed very deep fissures in Turkish culture. 
Starting at the end of May, more and more opponents of the renovations began gathering in the square. 
Protests evolved into a general condemnation of the government, becoming more chaotic, with police attacking protesters with water cannons and tear gas. 
Thousands have been injured and at least two protesters and one police officer have died. 
The demonstrations have spread to other cities.
Although Erdoğan has claimed to be open to "democratic demands," he has denied the legitimacy of all the public unrest. 
A day after the prime minister proposed talks with protesters, bulldozers and riot police swept through the square and blanketed the area with tear gas. 
Chaos and standoffs between police and protesters continue.
Debating the causes of the conflict, some commentators focus on the role of Islam in Turkey; others emphasize disagreements about the nature of Turkish democracy, the lack of civil liberties, or the nascent environmentalist movement, which was stirred by plans to take down trees in the square's Gezi Park.
All these played a role in igniting unrest, but the issues surrounding the reconstruction of the Ottoman Taksim Military Barracks in particular point to deep unresolved historical tensions within the Republic of Turkey. 
The protesters and the government are engaging not only in a battle for their park and perhaps their country's future, but also for control over the past.
When Mustafa Kemal Atatürk founded the Republic of Turkey in 1923, after years of war, he was embraced by a population eager to return to the days of the great Caliphs. 
But Atatürk chose, instead, to modernize, Westernize, and secularize the country. 
He disbanded the Caliphate, secularized the education system, outlawed Sufi Islam, enforced gender equality, Westernized the Turkish alphabet, and famously banned the fez. 
But these radical and sometimes ruthless steps, especially those that ran counter to perceived Islamic mores, engendered deep resentment and resistance.
In the last decade, Erdoğan and his Justice and Development Party, known as AKP, have exploited that resistance as an element in their rise to power. 
Under AKP rule, the Ottoman past has re-emerged in a culturally powerful way. 
The movie "Fetih 1453," a highly dramatized account of the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople in 1453, had the biggest budget in the history of Turkish cinema, an investment handsomely rewarded by its box office returns.
Turkish television is full of Ottoman-era dramas and soap operas, including the wildly successful "Magnificent Century," set in the era of the famous emperor Suleiman the Magnificent. 
More and more aspects of elite Turkish culture embrace Ottoman architecture, fashion and even food. 
But according to some opponents of the AKP, the cultural embrace of Ottoman history promotes a political agenda of regional domination.
The decision to rebuild a symbol of Ottoman militarism, the Taksim Military Barracks, like the decision to name the new Bosphorus bridge after Sultan Selim I, conqueror of the Arab world, feeds this speculation. 
In popular Turkish culture, the Taksim Barracks are associated with the killing of Christian army officers in 1909, while the Alevis -- a large minority group in Turkey -- remember Selim I as the murderer of their people. 
Thus, both bridge and barracks pit one view of history against another.
But the Ottomans were not merely expansionary conquerors, nor were they generally devoted to Islamic purity. 
At their best, the Sultans ruled over a surprisingly pluralistic society that enabled people of diverse religions and ethnicities to flourish and live in relative autonomy. 
Both non-Turkish Muslims and non-Muslims rose to great heights of political power. 
Jews fled from Christian persecutions into Ottoman territory. 
In the wake of the riots, elements of this Ottoman legacy have begun to emerge as well.
Devrim Evin, who played Sultan Mehmet II in "Fetih 1453," declined to join Istanbul's formal celebration of the 560th anniversary of the conquest of Constantinople. 
Instead, joining actors from "Magnificent Century," he went to Gezi Park to support the protests. 
Thus, the protesters were treated to actors playing Mehmet the Conqueror and Suleyman the Magnificent marching and tweeting alongside them.
Evin, like Erdoğan, invoked Ottoman history. 
He said, just before the violence began, that Mehmet preserved the Orthodox basilica Hagia Sophia when he took the city. 
"Such were our ancestors," he said. 
"They preserved things, did not destroy or tear down."
As with any turbulent situation, it's hard to predict what will happen in Gezi Park or within the broader cycles of social unrest emerging in Turkey. 
Erdoğan looks unlikely to back down, at least not without a huge loss of face. 
Because the AKP has enjoyed broad popular support for its agenda, it will require internal pressure from within the movement to push Erdoğan toward a consensus settlement.
But even if issues involving Taksim Square are eventually resolved without greater riots and brutality, the question of the meaning and relevance of the Ottoman past remains powerful.
In "Fetih 1453," Mehmet proclaims, "Making history is no job for cowards." 
The events unfolding in Taksim remind us that remembering history can be just as dangerous as making it.


Vodafone in preliminary bid for German cable TV company
Vodafone has admitted that it is courting Germany's top cable television company for a possible takeover.
The British mobile operator confirmed its approach to Kabel Deutschland, which supplies 8.5m German households. 
Market speculation has the bid worth 10bn euros ($13.3m; £8.5m).
It would mark a change in strategy for Vodafone, that has largely focused on mobile phone services in Europe.
Vodafone is one of the world's largest mobile phone companies.
It has more than 407m customers worldwide.
Reports suggested that talks between the two have not formally started, because the German company believed the price suggested by Vodafone was too low.
In a statement, Vodafone said: "There is no certainty that any offer will ultimately be made, nor as to the terms on which any such offer might be made."
The British company recently expanded its presence in Germany by announcing a link-up with Deutsche Telekom to offer pay-TV via high-speed broadband to its customers.


Widow of ex-KGB agent Litvinenko wants expanded probe into poisoning
London (CNN) -- The widow of poisoned Russian spy Alexander Litvinenko asserted Tuesday that only a public inquiry will bring her justice in the death of her husband.
"I still believe in British justice. It's not easy because I didn't expect this long wait," Marina Litvinenko said outside the Royal Court of Justice after a pre-inquest hearing Tuesday.
Marina Litvinenko wants a public inquiry instead of an inquest, which, in Britain, is a proceeding to establish the facts around a sudden or unexplained death.
A public inquiry is a different proceeding that would "enable the fullest possible investigation" into Alexander Litvinenko's death and, unlike an inquest, can receive evidence behind closed doors, the coroner said during Tuesday's hearing.
In Litvinenko's case, such evidence could involve matters of national security.
On Tuesday, Coroner Sir Robert Owen said he is waiting for a response from the secretary of justice on his petition last week to hold a public inquiry instead of an inquest.
Litvinenko, a former KGB agent and fierce critic of Russian President Vladimir Putin, came to Britain in 2000 after turning whistle-blower on the FSB, the KGB's successor.
He died at a London hospital November 23, 2006, after being poisoned by the radioactive material polonium-210 while drinking tea at the Millennium Hotel in London's Grosvenor Square.
In a deathbed statement, Litvinenko blamed Putin, an accusation the Kremlin has strongly denied.
Marina Litvinenko's lawyer, Ben Emmerson, said during Tuesday's hearing the widow would be unable to play a role in an ongoing proceedings if the government refused the coroner's request.
"The inquest should now stand adjourned. There should be a full stop at the inquest until the matter is resolved," Emmerson said.
Neil Garnham, a lawyer representing the home secretary at the hearing, said a decision on a public inquiry would be made as quickly as possible.
Emmerson charged Tuesday that a foreign office minister made what he said was an "improper approach" to Litvinenko's widow while British Prime Minister David Cameron and Putin met in Sochi, Russia, last month.
The representative approached the widow without reaching her legal team first, Emmerson said. 
He wanted assurances for Litvinenko that discussions in Sochi would not affect the government's attitude to a full investigation into her husband's death, Emmerson added.
"I have to say I am astonished," Owen said about the contact.
Garnham said nothing improper occurred.
"The foreign office knew that there was likely to be some reporting in the public press of a meeting between Foreign Office ministers and Russian officials about security matters. 
As a matter of simple courtesy, the minister telephoned Mrs. Litvinenko to let her know of the fact of the meeting, not to discuss the contents, but simply to inform her," Garnham said.
The next hearing into the case is expected in early July.
Prosecutors in London want Russia to extradite Andrei Lugovoi, suspected in the killing, but Russia has repeatedly refused to do so.
In another hearing last December, the counsel to the inquest, Hugh Davies, said evidence provided by the U.K. government shows Russian involvement in the former KGB agent's death and "does establish a prima facie case as to the culpability of the Russian state in the death of Alexander Litvinenko."
In that hearing, Emmerson said Litvinenko was working for the British intelligence service MI6 and had been tasked by MI6 with working also for the Spanish intelligence service as it investigated Russian mafia activities in Spain.
While ill in the hospital, Litvinenko called Lugovoi about a planned trip together to Spain, a phone call that was witnessed by his wife, Emmerson said.
The men were both to provide intelligence to the Spanish prosecutor investigating Russian mafia links to the Kremlin and to Putin, Emmerson said.
In March, exiled Russian oligarch Boris Berezovsky was found dead in the United Kingdom, and his death was deemed "consistent with hanging" with no sign of a violent struggle, British investigators said.
But the death of Berezovsky, 67, triggered speculation about the fate of a onetime tycoon known for his opposition to Putin.
Berezovsky also blamed the Kremlin for the death of Litvinenko. 
For years, Berezovsky bankrolled the effort of Litvinenko's widow to push for an inquest into her husband's death.
Last month, Edward Lucas, international editor of The Economist, told CNN's Fareed Zakaria that Litvinenko was a former security official -- akin to an FBI agent.
"He annoyed the Kremlin in lots of ways. He had been involved in domestic power battles in the Kremlin, where he complained about the role of organized crime inside the Russian security service. He then defected very publicly," said Lucas, author of "Deception: The Untold Story of East-West Espionage Today."
"In effect they used a ... radioactive weapon, a weapon of terror against a British citizen in broad daylight in the streets of London endangering lots of other people," Lucas said. 
"I think we still don't quite understand what the Russian motivation was. What we do know is that the British government doesn't want to get into detail about how they know about it, and that to me suggests that they were tapping Russian phones, reading Russian diplomatic communications, bugging Russian officers."


Deja vu for Dole as CEO makes bid to take company private again
David H. Murdock, who last took over Dole Food in 2003, has made an unsolicited buyout offer for the 60% chunk of the company he doesn't already own.
Billionaire David H. Murdock has made an unsolicited buyout offer for the 60% chunk of Dole Food Co. that he doesn't already own, valuing the Westlake Village company at nearly $1.1 billion.
The bid of $12 a share marks the latest step in Dole's dance in and out of public ownership and represents an 18% premium over the stock's closing price Monday of $10.20. Shares of the world's largest fresh fruit and vegetable producer finished Tuesday up 22%, or $2.26, at $12.46.
Murdock, who is Dole's chairman, chief executive and largest shareholder, presented his proposal to the board Monday night in proceedings probably marked by deja vu.
When Murdock last took over Dole in 2003, he held 24% of the company's outstanding shares. 
He shelled out $33.50 a share, or $1.4 billion, for the remainder, while also assuming about $1 billion in debt. 
In 2009, he took the company public in its second initial public offering.
Since then, he's watched Dole take a downturn.
Extreme weather, including a cycle of scorching heat and severe cold that attacked Dole strawberry farms in California, has made the fresh fruit and vegetable industry especially volatile. 
The company said it expects lower earnings this year from its banana and berry operations.
Last year, it reported revenue from continuing operations of $4.2 billion, down 11% from the prior year.
In April, Dole shrank to a smaller footprint after wrapping up the sale of its global packaged foods and Asia fresh foods businesses to Japanese firm Itochu Corp. for nearly $1.7 billion. T
he divisions represented a third of Dole's revenue and more than half of its operating income.
Murdock, who had served as chief executive from July 1985 through June 2007, was reinstated at that point after David A. DeLorenzo stepped down from the post to help Itochu run its new businesses.
Last month, Dole suddenly suspended a $200-million share repurchase program it had announced a few weeks earlier, saying it needed to redirect its resources to expanding its fleet of container ships. 
Dole also said "significant losses" in its strawberry business dragged down earnings.
The announcement caused a 16% stock slide within a week.
As the company struggled, its chief executive was building up his liquidity position. 
Last year, Murdock sold most of the Hawaiian island of Lanai to Oracle Corp. CEO and fellow billionaire Larry Ellison for a reported $500 million.
So although Murdock's proposed coup took many on Wall Street by surprise, "it probably should not have," wrote Barclays analyst Hale Holden in a note to investors.
Some said they smelled something rotten in Murdock's timing.
New York law firm Wohl & Fruchter, which holds no stake in Dole, said it is inviting shareholders to join its nascent investigation of the buyout bid.
Scheduling the proposal so soon after calling off the share repurchase program "seems like an attempt to exploit the weakness in the stock price," said J. Elazar Fruchter, a partner at the firm.
Murdock's $12-a-share offer is less than September's 52-week high of $15.19 a share as well as the $12.50 a share at which Dole last went public, Fruchter said. 
He said Tuesday's closing price above $12 suggested that investors may want a better offer.
"We've seen this in the past, when a shareholder wants to purchase a company and makes an effort in advance to draw the stock price down to make his or her offer appear favorable in comparison," he said. 
"It's not illegal, but it is a question of whether they're acting in shareholders' interests."
But Wall Street analysts seemed satisfied.
Given Murdock's past successes with the company, Holden of Barclays wrote that the proposal has "a relatively high probability of completion." 
Analysts at Janney, in a note to investors, called Murdock's bid "an attractive transaction that is likely to proceed at or relatively close to this price level" despite "tougher than average near-term trends in bananas."
Murdock said he would also assume the company's debt in the transaction. 
Deutsche Bank, serving as an advisor to Murdock, wrote in a letter that it is "highly confident" in Murdock's abilities to finance the deal, he said. 
He hopes to solidify a deal by the end of July.
The Dole board said in a statement Tuesday that it would meet in the next few days to review its options.
The oldest CEO in the Fortune 500, Murdock is the grayest member of a crop of executives trying recently to take the ownership reins of their companies.
Michael Dell, founder and chief executive of technology company Dell Inc., has support from the board for his quest to buy out the business. 
Shareholders are expected to vote on the proposal July 18.
In February, Barnes & Noble Inc. Chairman Leonard Riggio indicated in a regulatory filing that he plans an attempt to take over the retail side of the bookstore business he bought four decades ago. 
He is currently the company's largest shareholder.
Richard Schulze, Best Buy's founder and top shareholder, returned to the company in March as chairman emeritus, but not before spearheading a plan to acquire the electronics retailer. 
The plan subsequently was dropped.
None of the companies or executives, however, have been around quite as long as Murdock and Dole.
The produce behemoth began in 1851 as a trading company in Hawaii but takes its name from James Dole, a Harvard graduate with a yen for pineapples who arrived in the state in 1899.
And although not 162 years old, Murdock, 90, is closer than most.
The high school dropout is the son of a traveling salesman. 
He's also chairman, chief executive and president of Castle & Cooke Inc., a Los Angeles real estate and development company.
Additionally, Murdock is a health nut who in 2006 opened a 20-acre resort and health institute in Westlake Village. 
He attributes his longevity to his disciplined diet of fish, nuts and produce.


German inflation edges up, but under control
German inflation picked up in May, mainly driven by higher prices for foodstuffs. 
Falling fuel and telecommunication costs proved a damper, dispelling fears of runaway inflation on the back of cheap central bank money.
Prices paid by consumers in Germany grew 1.5 percent in May, compared with the same month in 2012 and edged up by 0.3 percent from the annual inflation rate recorded in March, Germany's statistics office, Destatis, said Wednesday.
Destatis' May data marked the second consecutive month of increasing prices after inflation in March slowed to its lowest level since 2010 with an annual rate of 1.2 percent.
Last month, prices were again driven by higher costs for foodstuffs, Destatis said. 
They have been rising steadily for one-and-a-half years.
Vegetables especially were more expensive, up 12.1 percent; followed by fruits, which cost 9.2 percent more than a year ago. 
Prices for meat and diary products were also up, by 5.6 and 4.3 percent respectively.
An additional boost to the consumer price index had come from lottery costs, Destatis noted, after a state-run lottery had increased its fees 21.1 percent in May.
In contrast, year-on-year costs for car and heating fuels slumped 3.7 and 5.9 percent respectively. 
In addition, cheaper services in the German telecommunications, finance and health sectors restrained inflation in May.
Destatis also said that under calculation methods used by the European Union's Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) annual inflation in May rose to 1.6 percent from 1.1 percent in April.
Despite the increase, Germany had effectively reached price stability, Destatis said, because for months annual inflation had remained below the 2-percent stability threshold set by the European Central Bank (ECB).
The low inflation rate in Europe's biggest economy, might serve to dispel fears of runaway inflation in the crisis-hit eurozone as a result of the ECB's controversial monetary policy in recent months.
In May, the central bank cut interest rates to a historically low 0.5 percent. 
At the end of last year it announced a plan for aggressive monetary easing, including bond purchases of heavily-indebted eurozone countries, under efforts to defend the euro and to kickstart sluggish growth in the 17-nation currency area.


Lululemon must look for cultural fit in CEO search
(Reuters) - Premium workout wear maker Lululemon Athletica Inc (LLL.TO) (LULU.O) will not have an easy job replacing Chief Executive Christine Day, the company's public face who built up the brand to be an international powerhouse over the past half decade.
Day, who announced her surprise departure plans after markets closed on Monday, was also behind Lulu's blistering growth rate and its transition from yummy mummy niche to broader, multi-sport appeal.
But the costly quality control problems that tarnished the end of Day's tenure will also dog her successor even as he, or perhaps more likely she, attempts to adapt to a distinctive Lululemon culture that prides itself on strong community ties and a connection with its fiercely loyal customers.
"Most CEO searches fail because there wasn't enough analysis and assessment around fit, especially going into a strong corporate culture like Lululemon," said Bob Damon, president of Americas at executive search agency Korn/Ferry International.
"Just because someone was successful at the Gap, it doesn't mean that they will be successful at Lululemon. It's not about what you've accomplished as a CEO, it's about how you have accomplished it."
Lululemon carved out a lucrative niche with its high-end, fashionable yogawear, reporting quarter after quarter of stunning sales and profit growth.
But a March recall of excessively see-through black pants proved a huge blow, and its latest tepid sales growth forecasts are well below year-ago levels.
The stock sank nearly 18 percent to close at $67.85 on the Nasdaq and C$69.22 in Toronto on Tuesday, its lowest level since April, on concern about the succession plan.
Day, describing quitting as a "personal decision," said she would step down once Lululemon finds a replacement.
Maurizio Calconi, who leads the retail and consumer practice at Toronto-based IQ Partners search firm, said it will likely take about 12 weeks to compile a short list of candidates and a new CEO could be named by December.
Any applicants can expect a careful vetting by Dennis "Chip" Wilson, who founded Lululemon in 1998 and remains the company's chairman and largest voting shareholder.
The low-profile Wilson made an uncharacteristic appearance on the company's press release on Monday, saying he was confident Lulu would find the right person.
Industry sources said possible candidates for Day's job include: Chanel CEO Maureen Chiquet, Nike vice president Jan Singer, Warnaco Group Inc CEO Helen McCluskey, Victoria's Secret Direct CEO Bridget Ryan Berman, and Tumi Holdings CEO Jerome Griffith.
Early challenges facing the new incumbent include ever tougher competition from the likes of Under Armour, Nike Inc, and Gap Inc's Athleta banner.
The new boss must also deal with the supply chain problems that caused the multimillion-dollar recall of Lululemon's popular black yoga pants, which simply revealed too much when the wearer bent in yoga poses.
The recall was the second serious quality control issue in a year; earlier brightly colored items bled the dyes.
Howard Davidowitz, chairman of Davidowitz & Associates, a retail consulting and investment banking firm based in New York City, said the supply chain mismanagement represents a fundamental failing.
"These are people (directors) who built other very successful businesses. They know this is nuts. They know how fundamental and stupid this is. How could this happen? That's their question and there is no answer," he said.
Belus Capital Advisors chief equities strategist Brian Sozzi said Lululemon will need to pick a new boss carefully from a corporate pool that is dominated by older, male executives.
"Here's a lady that's been the face of this company for five years," he said. 
"If (the new CEO) is a 60-year-old guy, or a 40-year-old guy, I don't know if he could share that same affinity, that personal attachment with Lululemon."


Vodafone makes bid for German cable firm Kabel Deutschland
UK mobile phone giant Vodafone has confirmed it seeks to buy German cable network operator Kabel Deutschland. 
As Germany's biggest cable firm is already in the focus of other telecoms firms, its price tag is set to rise.
Vodafone had made a preliminary approach to Kabel Deutschland (KD), as it sought to make a possible offer for the German cable network operator, the British mobile phone company announced Wednesday.
"There is no certainty that any offer will ultimately be made, nor as to the terms on which any such offer might be made," the UK-based group added in a brief statement.
The move is seen as heating up the takeover race for Germany's biggest cable network operator, which, apart from Vodafone, has also been in the focus of US cable giant Liberty Global.
Hartman Capital analyst Basil Petrides told Reuters news agency that Vodafone's bid was to be considered as part of a defensive strategy, aimed at preventing a takeover by Liberty Global, which had already bought German cable networks Unitymedia and Kabel BW.
Vodafone has been pursuing a takeover of KD since earlier this year, and hired Goldman Sachs in search of advice on the deal, estimated to cost about 10 billion euros ($13 billion). Analysts said Vodafone must offer at least 80 euros for each KD share, and that it needed to cover the cable operator's debt to the tune of 2.8 billion euros.
In stock market reactions, Vodafone shares plummeted about 5 percent in London on Wednesday, while those in Kabel Deutschland surged more than 8 percent to 81 euros per share.


49 states enjoyed GDP growth last year, study says
All states in the U.S., with the exception of Connecticut, saw growth in gross domestic product last year, a new study says.
Leading the way was North Dakota, where a wealth of oil fueled by fracking in the Bakken Shale has led to boom times and a 13.4% jump in GDP, according to a Bureau of Economic Analysis report.
That far exceeds the average U.S. GDP -- known as real GDP -- which clocked in at 2.5% last year, a slight jump from the 1.6% growth experienced in 2011.
Connecticut was the only state to show a GDP decline of 0.1%, where government cutbacks and turmoil in the financial and real estate businesses have hurt the state's chances of bouncing back.
"One of the things that Connecticut has done, which is showing up in these numbers, is shrink the size of government faster than just about every other state," Gov. Dannel Malloy told the Hartford Courant. 
"That is not generally understood. So that has a negative impact and specifically had a negative impact in 2012."
North Dakota's oil rush, by contrast, has created almost 2,000 fresh millionaires each year from oil royalties, according to University of North Dakota's Center for Innovation.


Airliner market set to double in two decades, says Boeing
Global demand for aircraft in the next 20 years will be stronger than previously thought, US planemaker Boeing has said, as passenger numbers are set to double. 
Boeing's estimate is even higher than that of rival Airbus.
Boeing expects global demand to rise to 35,280 aircraft by 2032, valuing $4,800 billion (3,600 billion euros), the US planemaker said on Tuesday.
The figures marked significant increases from estimates made in July 2012, when Boeing predicted 3.8 percent fewer sales and 7.0 percent lower revenues for the period between 2013 and 2032.
The upward revision came as Boeing predicted a rise in the number of passegners carried annually from three billion this year to 6 billion in 2032, said Randy Tinseth, Boeing's vice president for marketing.
Speaking in the run-up to the Le Bourget International Air Show in Paris, due to open next Monday, Tinseth also said that 60 percent of the demand would come from Asia, Latin America and the Middle East. 
Markets in North America and Europe would account for the remaining 40 percent, equivalent to about 14,000 airplanes, he added.
Boeing predicted that about 24,670 of the about 35,000 new aircraft would be single-aisle planes, seating between 90 and 230 passengers. 
Only about 760 were expected to be large wide-body jets with a capacity of more than 400 passengers.
By contrast, rival European aircraft maker Airbus was more confident about future sales of big airplanes, predicting higher demand for its A380 superjumbo in view of growing passenger numbers.
Moreover, Airbus predicted that global demand would rise only to 28,200 aircraft by 2031 in its latest 20-year forecast released in September 2012.
According to figures also released by Boeing, the number of commercial airplanes in operation today stands at 20,310 aircraft. 
Taking into account the withdrawal from service of older planes, this would put the global fleet at 41,240 by 2032.


Amazon.com expands its grocery delivery service to Los Angeles
AmazonFresh offers same-day and early-morning delivery on more than 500,000 products, but the service may face hurdles that have dogged other online grocers.
Online retail giant Amazon.com Inc., known for its speedy distribution of books, electronics and other consumer goods, is now trying to break open the grocery market.
The AmazonFresh service, running since 2007 in the retailer's Seattle hometown, expanded to select Los Angeles ZIP Codes on Monday. 
The company is offering customers same-day and early-morning delivery on more than 500,000 products, such as apples, bread and even mozzarella di bufala from the Cheese Store of Beverly Hills.
Analysts expect the service to expand to nearly two dozen other markets by the end of next year, a prospect that Amazon declined to discuss. 
But the program may face the same difficulties that have dogged the rest of the $6-billion online grocery market, which has struggled for years to overcome lukewarm consumer interest.
"Though consumers are becoming increasingly comfortable with Internet purchases of books, movies, and the like, many appear to be hesitant to make food and drink Internet purchases," Mintel researchers wrote in a recent report.
Even a company currently selling through Amazon expressed reservations about the expansion.
Ken Simril, chief executive of Fleischmann's Vinegar Co. in Cerritos, said the food delivery service could encounter growing pains such as expensive fuel in the congested Southland and trouble navigating delivery trucks through tight hill and beach roads. 
In addition, the grocery industry is notorious for high costs and slim profits, he said.
"Amazon's done a great job in the e-commerce space, but it's different when you're dealing with perishables," Simril said. 
"They may have some new secret sauce to deal with it, but if they're planning to just throw money and assets at the logistical challenges like everyone else, good luck."
Amazon said it would fulfill orders out of its sprawling distribution center in San Bernardino. 
Amazon didn't detail how it would handle deliveries from restaurants and specialty retailers that participate in the service, but noted that they could take longer than products coming from the Inland Empire warehouse.
Here's how the service works:
Orders that come in by 10 a.m. will be delivered by 6 p.m. in sealed, temperature-controlled tote bags. 
Purchases made after 10 p.m. will arrive by 6 a.m., barring some items from local restaurants and specialty shops such as the Pie Hole and Steingarten LA.
Local subscribers to Amazon's Prime program can try out AmazonFresh without a fee for 90 days but will have to shell out $299 a year afterward, which includes the $79 annual fee for Prime's membership perks. 
Customers can avoid an additional delivery fee by spending at least $35 on groceries during each online shopping trip.
With its Internet grocery push, just a few months after launching an online wine marketplace last fall, Amazon is trying to muscle into an industry that has only recently gained some traction.
Years of food-safety scandals have left supermarket shoppers with trust issues. 
Many only feel comfortable buying groceries that they can inspect in person.
The industry has also been scarred by several high-profile flameouts.
Foster City company Webvan — which promised to deliver groceries in several U.S. markets, including Los Angeles — went bankrupt in 2001 and is owned by Amazon. 
Publix Super Markets Inc., which operates in the southeastern U.S., shut down its online delivery venture in 2003.
The recession also dampened online grocery growth, said Nikoleta Panteva, senior retail analyst with IBISWorld. 
Shoppers wanted to bargain-shop in stores and were wary of Internet delivery charges and membership fees.
But as the hiring market strengthens and disposable income increases, consumers have less inclination and free time to roam bricks-and-mortar grocery stores, Panteva wrote in a report last year.
Convenience has become key, especially as broadband Internet connections have surged 16.4% on average each year since 2007, Panteva wrote.
The online grocery industry is expected to grow 9.5% a year through 2017, compared with 1.2% growth each year from 2007 to 2012, according to IBISWorld.
AmazonFresh, whose Los Angeles rollout was first reported by the Wall Street Journal last week, is already sharing its space with some major rivals.


Apple aims to show critics it hasn't lost its innovative edge
The tech giant unveils an overhaul of its mobile operating system and its iTunes radio streaming service to kick off its annual developers conference.
SAN FRANCISCO — Apple Inc. unveiled a daring overhaul of its mobile operating system to kick off its annual developers conference, where it hopes to show critics that it has lost none of its innovative swagger.
In addition to unveiling iOS 7, the company made a blizzard of other product and feature announcements that included upgrades to MacBook laptops and a new streaming radio service. 
As expected, there were no new iPhones or iPads, which are often announced separately.
But the presentation seemed in spirit to also be a rebuttal to critics who contended that Apple had lost its innovative edge in the last year. 
Along with iOS 7, the weeklong conference here is just as likely to be remembered for Apple Senior Vice President Phil Schiller's lively jab at critics about the company's supposed lack of innovation after giving attendees a peek at a new Mac Pro with a cylindrical design.
The effect of anything announced Monday won't be known for months. 
The company said most of the new hardware and software products wouldn't be available until this fall or later in the year. 
After initially pushing the stock price up during the keynote speech, investors ultimately drove it down $2.92, or less than 1%, to $438.89.
The investors' reaction may be partly because the iTunes Radio streaming service introduced Monday (but not available until the fall) seemed less consequential than much of the hype it had received in recent weeks as Apple worked furiously to close deals with music labels before the conference. 
The company revealed iTunes Radio toward the end of the keynote amid a long list of new features for iOS 7, rather than trumpeting it as a radical new music service designed to tackle competitors like Pandora and Spotify.
The service will enable users to create free, ad-based radio stations, similar to Pandora, designed to help them discover new music with the apparent intent to drive the purchase of more digital downloads.
James McQuivey, a Forrester Research analyst, said there may have simply been unrealistic public expectations that anything Apple did related to music would be big.
"There's not a lot left in the music experience that you can really revolutionize," McQuivey said. 
"But maybe because it's Apple, we just assumed that once they set their mind to it, they would do something that changes the game. As it turns out, this didn't."
Still, there was plenty that did seem to galvanize the 5,000 developers in attendance this week, a crowd inclined to be dazzled by all things Apple. 
They burst into applause when lights dimmed. 
And new announcements were often met with big cheers or oohs and ahs.
It was this important constituency that Apple Chief Executive Tim Cook seemed intent on addressing by starting the keynote with a kind of methodical stump speech. 
He rattled off a list of statistics to make his case that Apple's mobile platform is a far better deal for developers than Google's Android, even if the latter is used on many more phones now.
Cook noted, for instance, that Apple has paid $10 billion to developers since the App Store opened five years ago, half of that in just the last year. 
He claimed that amount was more than three times as much as all other mobile platforms combined. 
And Cook said the 575 million accounts at the App Store were more than any other store on the Internet.
"This is a developers conference," said Colin Gillis, a research analyst at BGC Partners. 
"And if you are a developer, you want to be able to eat and pay your rent. It's clear that Apple is the place to go to monetize your apps."
The company then ran through a long list of announcements, including new MacBook Air laptops with an astonishing nine-to-12-hour battery life. 
And it revealed the new version of its Mac operating system, Mac OS X Mavericks, departing from its recent history of naming Mac operating systems after large cats. 
Mavericks will continue a trend of building in more features available on iOS, such as better cloud-based services.
But the centerpiece of the day was iOS 7, the first version since Cook put Apple's hardware design guru Jonathan Ive in charge of the look and feel of software last year.
As expected, the new design comes with a new color palette of bright, pastel shades. 
App buttons are translucent, as are some other features. 
The company ditched digital effects like leather casing on address books and calendars and green felt on its gaming center in favor of bright bubbles and simpler, fresher looks.
"It's the biggest change to iOS since the introduction of iPhone," Cook said.
Just as important to developers, though, was probably a host of new ways they can integrate their apps into Apple services such as maps, Siri and new forms of multi-tasking that will be available.
After the keynote speech, Rob Rhyne, chief executive of app development company Martian Craft, said he was already huddling with his team to figure out how to take advantage of all the new design and feature goodies Apple had thrown their way.
"My overall feeling is, 'Wow,' Rhyne said. 
"It seemed like they'd been quiet for the last six months and today they came out with guns blazing. You just saw Apple at its best."


Battery maker Exide Technologies files for bankruptcy protection
In its Chapter 11 bankruptcy filing, Exide cites the forced suspension of operations at its Vernon lead-recycling plant and other economic factors.
Battery maker Exide Technologies filed for bankruptcy protection Monday, citing the forced suspension of operations at its Vernon lead-recycling plant and other economic factors.
Exide, one of the world's largest makers and recyclers of lead-acid batteries, said in court papers that since the plant's April 24 closure by state regulators, the Georgia company has had to tap other sources of lead, driving up costs and cutting earnings.
"As a result of the Vernon shutdown and the company's poor financial performance in the fourth fiscal quarter of 2013, it became apparent that a successful out-of-court restructuring was unlikely," Chief Financial Officer Phillip Damaska wrote in a filing in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Delaware.
Exide's Chapter 11 petition lists assets of $1.9 billion and debts of $1.1 billion. 
The action, which does not affect the company's non-U.S. operations, will allow it to restructure and reduce its debt.
It is unclear what effect, if any, the bankruptcy will have on Exide's cleanup operations in Vernon and elsewhere. 
State officials said Monday that Exide must still comply with applicable laws, but environmental advocates expressed concerns that the company might use bankruptcy to duck its obligations.
Exide's stock closed at 20 cents a share Monday, down 3.4%.
California's Department of Toxic Substances Control halted operations at the Vernon facility this spring after The Times published articles about its arsenic emissions. 
The South Coast Air Quality Management District said the plant posed an elevated cancer risk to as many as 110,000 people in the area. 
Toxics officials also said a degraded pipeline at the plant had continually released hazardous waste into the soil.
Exide disputes the allegations and is contesting the suspension order. 
A hearing that began last week before an administrative law judge is to resume at an undetermined date.
The Vernon plant, which melted thousands of batteries a day, has a long history of air pollution and hazardous waste violations, including allegations that lead dust, a neurotoxin, fell onto nearby rooftops and sidewalks, according to regulators' reports. 
Even so, state toxics regulators had allowed it to operate on "interim status" since the 1980s, drawing fire from community groups and environmental activists.
Liza Tucker, an advocate with Santa Monica-based Consumer Watchdog, said the $10 million the company has posted for cleanup will fall far short of what is needed.
"Not only is the DTSC falling down on protecting consumers from toxic harm," she said in a news release. 
"It is also falling down on protecting them from fiscal harm."
In a statement, the department said it "is in discussions with Exide ... to ensure corrective action investigation and cleanup are carried out."


California car repair costs among highest in nation, analysis finds
California remains one of the nation's three most expensive states for car repairs, according to a new analysis by CarMD.
The finding is based on what it costs, on average, when a driver's "check engine" warning light appears.
CarMD’s state-by-state ranking of repair costs was based on detailed analysis of 161,350 repairs on model year 1996 to 2012 vehicles last year
Damage from Hurricane Sandy might have helped New Jersey rank highest at an average cost of $392.99.
California ranked second among states in 2012. 
The average cost for check engine-related car repairs in California last year was $390.37, up 6% from the previous year.
The least expensive state was Vermont, with an average repair cost of $269.72.
Kristin Brocoff, spokeswoman for CarMD, said the firm is careful about trying not to suggest too many reasons behind the averages.
But Brocoff did say that higher real estate costs for repair shops and dealerships in California were probably a factor, as was Californians' preference for high-tech cars.
"There are a higher percentage of hybrids on the road in California," Brocoff said, adding "that requires a lot of serious training for technicians to be able to work on those very high-tech vehicles."
CarMD doesn't speculate on road conditions in the various states, but that might also have been a factor.
Earlier this year, the American Society of Civil Engineers reported that 68% of California’s roads are in poor or mediocre condition.
Brocoff added that long commutes and the California lifestyle also meant that drivers were in their cars more often.
"Californians live in their cars. They have longer commutes, more wear and tear on their cars," Brocoff said. 
"They are likely to have more miles on their vehicles."


Coke Enterprises shares slide after warning
(Reuters) - Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc (CCE.N) shares fell after the company warned that persistent economic weakness in Europe, bad weather, a sharp excise tax increase in France and fierce competition in Britain have dampened its outlook for the second quarter.
Shares of the European bottler of Coca-Cola (KO.N) drinks fell 3 percent in morning trade to $36.06 on the New York Stock Exchange after it said those factors have been "unexpectedly persistent".
"Though we expect some of these challenges to abate as we move through the year, we will better understand the full-year impact of these factors as we move deeper into the prime summer selling season," said Chief Executive John Brock in a statement.
(Reporting by Martinne Geller in New York; Editing by Gerald E. McCormick)


Conservative economists back Jason Furman for key White House post
WASHINGTON -- A group of 11 conservative economists are publicly backing Jason Furman's nomination to head the White House Council of Economic Advisers.
"Although we often disagree with the administration’s policies and differ with Jason on a number of issues, we respect him as a superb analytical economist," the economists, all affiliated with the American Enterprise Institute think tank, wrote in a blog post Tuesday.
"If the Senate confirms his nomination to be the president’s chief economic adviser, we are confident that he will serve the president and the nation with distinction," they said.
President Obama has nominated Furman, a longtime aide, to the key economics post. 
He would succeed Alan Krueger, who is stepping down after a year and a half in the job to return to teaching at Princeton.
The council chair provides the president with advice and serves as a spokesperson for the administration on job creation and other economic issues.
Furman was a top economics aide to Obama's 2008 presidential campaign. 
Since 2009, he has served as principal deputy director of the White House National Economic Council, which coordinates the administration's policies.
"Jason Furman is one of the most brilliant economic minds of his generation," Obama said Monday in announcing the nomination. 
"He’s won the respect and admiration from his peers across the political spectrum. "
Tuesday's post on the AEIdeas blog showed that and was a strong indicator Furman will not have trouble getting confirmed by the Senate.
Among the economists backing his nomination was N. Gregory Mankiw, a Harvard economist who chaired the council under former President George W. Bush. Mankiw, a visiting scholar at AEI, was Furman's adviser for his doctorate degree in economics at Harvard.
Also signing the post was R. Glenn Hubbard, dean of the Columbia Business School and also a former council chair under Bush.
The group said Furman "has always been willing to work with economists of all ideological persuasions."
And although Furman's policy views are aligned with the administration's, "he recognizes that market mechanisms are the key element in raising living standards" and would be willing to tell Obama if something is a bad idea.
"We have considerable disagreements with President Obama’s economic policies and no doubt will have differences with his future economic agenda,." the economists wrote. 
"We are confident, however, that Jason Furman, if confirmed as CEA chair, will provide President Obama with advice that presents both the advantages and disadvantages of the policy proposals under consideration," the said.


Disparity in generic drug prices is a bitter pill to swallow
Finding out what the big pharmacy chains charge for generic prescription meds isn't easy. 
Turns out they're all over the map, depending on where and how you buy them.
Generic prescription drugs have to meet exacting standards for ingredients and quality, which you'd think would make them uniformly priced at pharmacies.
But that, of course, isn't the case. 
Generic drug prices can be all over the map, depending on where and how you buy them.
Bruce Lowther, 45, takes five generic prescription meds daily for a heart condition. 
He had a heart attack a few years ago.
Lowther was paying nearly $370 every three months for supplies of his drugs at Target. 
That was after his insurance covered the rest.
"I wanted to find out if I could get a better deal elsewhere," Lowther told me. 
"I thought it would be easy to find out."
It wasn't. 
And his experience speaks volumes about the lack of transparency in medical pricing, not to mention what appear to be huge profit margins at some leading pharmacy chains.
Lowther, an engineer and self-described "numbers guy" in Bristow, Va., started his investigation online. 
He found most of his drugs available at dirt-cheap prices.
For example, a 90-day supply of the generic equivalent of Plavix, an anti-clotting drug, could be found online for $21.52. 
It was available at Walgreens for $512.97.
But Lowther, wisely, was concerned about buying meds over the Internet from drugstores located who-knows-where. 
There have been numerous reports of overseas pharmacies selling tainted or even fraudulent prescription drugs.
So Lowther focused on local drugstores. 
He made a list of his drugs and their respective doses, and then visited 10 leading pharmacy chains. 
His request was simple: How much would he pay for the drug?
Turns out you can't just find that out, at least if you want to factor in your insurance.
"Each pharmacy said I'd first have to bring in a prescription from my doctor and fill it before I could find out how much I'd pay with insurance," Lowther said. 
"That means you have to commit to getting your drugs at that pharmacy before you know how much they cost."
He could have filled a prescription at each drugstore and then declined the transaction, but that's a lot of hassle. 
So Lowther asked each drugstore about its retail prices for the meds — that is, how much they'd cost without insurance. 
This, he figured, would provide a sense of which pharmacy offered better deals.
The results were astounding.
For example, a 90-day supply of the generic equivalent of the cholesterol drug Zocor cost $51.99 at Safeway, $62.97 at Walgreens, $75.99 at Target and $122.99 at CVS. 
At Costco, however, the price was just $9.99.
The generic equivalent of the hypertension drug Zestril cost $10 at Target, $28.99 at Safeway, $31.99 at Walgreens and $38.99 at CVS. 
But at Costco, the price again was $9.99.
In fact, Costco's drug prices consistently came in well below those of other leading pharmacies. 
And you don't even have to be a Costco member to use the company's drugstore.
Consumer Reports recently conducted its own survey of generic-drug prices. 
It, too, found that Costco consistently beat the leading pharmacy chains for low prices.
So I got in touch with Vic Curtis, senior vice president of Costco's pharmacy operations, and asked him how he did it.
"It's no secret," he replied. 
"We keep our costs down, operate efficiently and pass along our savings to customers."
Imagine that.
Specifically, Curtis said, Costco doesn't spend money on TV or print ads and thus doesn't have to pass along those costs to customers. 
He also said many Costco pharmacies are open primarily when people shop — 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. — not around the clock. 
This lowers overhead.
Operational differences are important. 
Costco has traded the convenience of having a drugstore in every neighborhood for the savings available to a big-box retailer.
Even so, there's still a huge gap between many of Costco's drug prices and those of rival pharmacies. 
Is Curtis selling popular drugs at a loss to get people into the store?
"Never," he said. 
"We always get a profit. We never lose money on the operation of a pharmacy or on any given prescription."
Kind of makes you wonder whether other drugstores are simply ripping people off with absurd markups for generics.
I contacted Walgreens, Target and CVS to ask why their drug prices were typically a lot higher than Costco's. 
None offered a direct answer to that question, but each defended its prices as being fair and reasonable.
"In addition to convenient locations and hours, it's important to consider the level of service a drugstore and its pharmacists provide," said Jim Cohn, a Walgreens spokesman.
"Our services include 24/7 online pharmacy access, drive-through service, automated refills, prescription labels available in 14 languages and more 24-hour locations than all drugstore chains combined," he said.
Jamie Bastian, a Target spokeswoman, said that "many factors can impact pharmacy charges, including a guest's insurance plan, price changes from manufacturers, whether a provider has named the pharmacy a preferred location and the guest's deductible."
Mike DeAngelis, a CVS spokesman, said that pricing surveys, whether conducted by an individual or Consumer Reports, "are not effective in accurately comparing prices between pharmacies, due to various value, discount and third-party insurance programs."
What I'm hearing from these big chains is that drug prices are complicated, so don't go thinking that it's just about who can offer a generic drug for less.
What I'm hearing from Costco is that drug prices are relatively simple, and that it's all about who can offer a generic drug for less.
It's up to each of us to choose which viewpoint they agree with, and how important it is not to have to drive miles to fill a prescription. 
I have to admit convenience is a factor for me, although not worth a possible markup of $100.
Lowther had no trouble making up his mind. 
He transferred all his prescriptions to Costco.


Electric car charging expenses vary widely, still cheaper than gas
People who drive electric cars pay the equivalent of $1.51 per gallon of gas in fueling expense in California but only 83 cents in North Dakota, according to new federal government figures.
The Energy Department data show the wide variability between states in the cost savings for charging electric vehicles. 
The national average is $1.14.
The data are available on a new calculator that is part of the Energy Department's launch of eGallon -- a way for consumers to compare the cost of fueling electric and gasoline vehicles.
For example, the national average eGallon price means that a typical electric vehicle could travel as far on $1.14 worth of electricity as a similar vehicle could travel on a gallon of gasoline. 
But there also can be swings in that figure within a state depending which utility district the electric car driver lives in and the expense of electricity in that region.
“Consumers can see gasoline prices posted at the corner gas station, but are left in the dark on the cost of fueling an electric vehicle,” said Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz. 
“The eGallon will bring greater transparency to vehicle operating costs, and help drivers figure out how much they might save on fuel by choosing an electric vehicle. It also shows the low and steady price of fueling with electricity.”
The Energy Department said consumers will see less volatility in the eGallon price because electricity does not have the big cost swings that plague the oil industry. 


Europe's car industry faces worst year in decades
A study by a German automotive research center has revealed that western Europe's car industry is experiencing its worst year in three decades. 
Demand for new vehicles is at a record low in many nations.
Overall car sales in Europe would suffer another setback throughout 2013, a survey by the Center Automotive Research (CAR) at Duisburg-Essen University in Germany claimed on Tuesday.
The study said, following an already weak 2012, sales would dip by another 5 percent on the continent this year to total 11.89 million vehicles.
It added that eurozone members France, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Greece would be hit hardest by the unfavorable business environment in the sector as there was no end in sight yet to the protracted debt crisis in the bloc of 17 countries using the euro.
No silver lining
The car market in those five countries was expected to plummet by another 9.6 percent, after already falling by a staggering 17 percent last year, the study said.
"Jobless people just aren't avid car buyers, and the upshot of it all is that the European auto industry is experiencing its worst year since the first oil crisis 30 years ago," CAR chief Ferdinand Dudenhöffer said in a statement.
Dudenhöffer added that, because of record-high unemployment rates in southern Europe, the chances for a swift recovery of the car market were next to zero. 
The study indicated that the countries worst-hit by the sales crisis would only be able to use 58 percent of their overall production capacities, the lowest level recorded since the end of World War II. 
A number of carmakers have already closed or are about to close some of their plants, including Peugeot-Citroen, Ford and Opel.


Financial woes have fallen to lowest level in 4 years, report says
Americans have seen their financial woes slowly abate, and now money-related problems have fallen to their lowest level in four years, a report says.
Consumers who reported financial troubles have dropped more than 50% since hitting a peak in September 2009, according to a Tuesday report from Consumer Reports. 
The index tracking these problems has fallen to its smallest level since April 2009.
Households that earned less than $50,000 and those that raked in more than $100,000 have experienced the largest drops in financial headaches, while middle-class Americans say their money worries got slightly worse last month.
"The data offer a glimpse that consumers may be starting to see and feel the progress of the economic recovery," said Ed Farrell, director of consumer insight at the Consumer Reports National Research Center.
But the uneven report reflects a slow economic recovery that has seen the income gap between the wealthiest American households and the rest of the country widen.
Upper-income households have led the way for discretionary spending, with consumer confidence hitting its highest level in nearly six years last month. 
That was bolstered in large part by well-heeled Americans who enjoyed the benefits of this year's sharp stock market rally.
Consumer Reports' trouble tracker looks at the proportion of consumers who have faced problems along with the number of troubling events, which include home foreclosures, job losses and not being able to afford medication.


French air traffic controllers start three-day strike
French aviation workers have started a three-day strike to protest the streamlining of traffic flows in European airspace. 
Airports in five cities were affected by the industrial action, but there was no big chaos.
The first leg of the strike on Tuesday saw about 1,800 flights cancelled, the French Civil Aviation Authority (DGAC) reported.
The action by air traffic controllers hit Paris' Charles de Gaulle and Orly hubs as well as airports in Nice, Lyon, Marseille and Toulouse. 
Airlines were asked to reduce their flights by 50 percent, the DGAC added.
Long-haul flights, however, were hardly affected by the strike, with the nation's biggest carrier, Air France, saying it had cancelled only short and mid-range tours.
Back to normalcy on Friday
Germany's flagship airline, Lufthansa announced it struck 174 of its flights Tuesday, while the country's second-largest carrier, Air Berlin, indicated its Paris and Nice routes had not been affected by the work stoppage at all.
Air traffic controllers said they were protesting the planned restructuring of Europe's airspace control system under the "Single European Sky" program, adding they feared the scheme would lead to more difficult working conditions and job cuts.
Reuters news agency maintained the strike had hindered preparations for the maiden flight of Airbus' new A350 ahead of the Paris Aviation Show on June 17.


Genmab shares tumble after fund sells shares
(Reuters) - Danish biotech firm Genmab's (GEN.CO) shares tumbled 11 percent on Tuesday after one of its leading shareholders, Meditor European Master Fund, sold its entire stake.
The fund had held more than 5 percent of Genmab shares earlier this month, according to a company fact sheet.
Johnson & Johnson (JNJ.N) is Genmab's top shareholder after the U.S. company agreed last year to acquire a 10.7 percent stake in exchange for global license rights to a cancer agent.
Genmab shares were trading at 194.9 crowns by 7:35 a.m. ET.
The company reported an operating profit of 29 million crowns in the three months through March compared with a 44 million loss in the same quarter last year. 
But it expects an operating loss of 40-90 million crowns in 2013.


German Constitutional Court opens hearing on ECB bonds
Germany's top court has begun a hearing to decide the legitimacy of the eurozone central bank's sovereign bond-buying policy. 
While the scheme is credited with easing market fears, sceptics say it poses too big a risk.
Germany's Constitutional Court on Tuesday morning began its hearing into controversial European Central Bank (ECB) purchases, known as Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs).
The central bank's decision to offer OMTs, in which it would buy up the sovereign debt of individual countries, is credited by some experts for helping to calm market fears and lowering borrowing costs of indebted nations.
The scheme was unveiled in August last year, but as yet no OMT has actually been carried out.
The plaintiffs at the Karlsruhe court - who include German politicians, lawyers and ordinary citizens - claim that the ECB has created a risk over which German taxpayers and officials have no control.
The opponents of OMTs also claim that the potential purchases of sovereign debt go beyond the bank's mandate as enshrined in EU treaties, which forbid it from financing governments.
Bundesbank's Weidmann to testify
The president of the Bundesbank, Germany's central bank, Jens Weidmann - who is among the most vocal critics of the scheme - was set to take the stand during the two-day hearing.
Taking the opposing side will be ECB board member Joerg Asmussen, who until last year was a senior German finance ministry official.
ECB President Mario Draghi has defended the OMT program, denying that it is effectively a scheme to print money to pay for governments' debts.
More than 35,000 Germans have brought a complaint against the OMT, illustrating a growing unease among some citizens in Europe's largest economy that they are being asked to pick up the debts of other countries.


German bank worker dozes, accidentally transfers millions to retiree
The supervisor of a German bank worker who fell asleep at the computer and accidentally transferred nearly $300 million to a retiree's account got her job back after winning the case in court Tuesday.
Her employee, a clerk, had dozed off and accidentally hit the number "2" key 11 times, sending €222,222,222.22 to an account of a retired pensioner, according to the Agence France Presse.
The correct amount that should have been sent? €62.40 (or about $82.60).
Unfortunately for the retiree, the bank rectified the mistake soon afterward. 
It also fired the supervisor for failing to spot the error, claiming that she didn't carefully check the transfer payments and therefore deceived her bosses, the report said.
The supervisor took her case to court and pointed out that her job entailed quickly checking hundreds of documents, the report said. 
That meant spending only seconds scanning each one.
The labor court called the error "a terrible mistake" but ruled the supervisor never intended to cause "deliberate harm" to the bank. 
The court ordered that she be given her old job back.


German minister calls for rethink on flood protection
Environment minister Peter Altmaier has reacted to Germany's record floods by calling for rivers to be given more room to buffer their floodwaters, if necessary through removal of riverside homes and relocation of dikes.
Germany record floods along the Elbe and Danube - just over a decade after its Elbe flood disaster in 2002 - were described by Environment Minister Peter Altmaier on Tuesday as "alarming" evidence that "extreme weather events" had become more frequent and required drastic hydrological remedies.
Altmaier told the Passauer Neuen Presse - the newspaper of the Bavarian river-junction city hit massively last week - that river terraces must be reclaimed as temporary overflow storage sites to prevent rivers peaking at dramatic levels.
Dikes must be set back further from waterways, larger flood terraces must be designated, and, as a last recourse, expropriation of riverside homes and premises could not be excluded, said Altmaier.
"We must prepare ourselves and reckon that in the future there will be more similar extreme high-water situations," he said.
Prepare, says municipalities' CEO
The chief executive of Germany's federal association representing 11,000 city, town and district councils, Dr. Gerd Landsberg, told the Rheinische Post newspaper of Düsseldorf that Germany needed fast-track flood-protection legislation.
This, said Landsberg, should give priority to flood-protection measures over protests by conservationists or riverside residents who oppose unsightly structures.
"We must give up the idea that a "100-year flood" only happens once every 100 years," Landsberg said. 
Recovery work this time round would take up to three years and cost Germany at least 10 billion euros ($13.2 billion), he estimated.
Environment minister Altmaier said that, of 18 projects along the Elbe to set back dikes and create more floodwater space, only four had actually been realized, often because of objections by land owners.
Their remarks precede a meeting on Thursday between Chancellor Angela Merkel and the premiers of Germany's 16 regional states or Länder.
Elbe flood crest grips northern Germany
The elongated flood crest of the river Elbe - roughly five meters (16.5 feet) above normal - has inundated riverside areas in five northern German states: Saxony-Anhalt, Brandenburg, Lower Saxony, Mecklenburg-West Pomerania and Schleswig Holstein. 
Officials warn that high levels will remain for days as the river drains toward Hamburg.
Train passengers face delays and route diversions because of an Elbe bridge closure enacted on Monday. 
Among those train links affected, according to Germany's rail operator Bundesbahn, are its long-distance services from Berlin via Hannover to Cologne and from Berlin to Frankfurt.
At Fischbeck, in Saxony-Anhalt's district of Stendal, Bundeswehr personnel with military helicopters carrying large sand sacks (pictured above) are still trying to plug a 50-meter wide dike breach.
The gap has channeled floodwaters across a federal highway and towards other towns. 
Across the Stendal district, some 11,000 residents have been evacuated or warned to leave danger zones.
The water level in Magdeburg, the state's capital, upriver, had dropped half a meter on Tuesday since its peak on Sunday when a key electric substation needed for pumps was nearly inundated. 
The level on Tuesday was still 13 centimeters higher than the city's previous record in 2002.
Brandenburg's city of Wittenberge is bracing itself for a historic high of 8.2 meters. 
Its median level is 2.77 meters.
Further north at Dömitz, in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania state, the water is 40 centimeters above its highest recorded level, leaving residents alarmed that dikes could break.
At Hitzzacker and Schnackenburg, in Lower Saxony state, the Elbe is flowing at levels half-a-meter higher than any previous measurements, according to the state's environmental ministry in Hanover.
Inland shipping left idle
Germany's BDB inland waterway shipping federation says cargo traffic was halted days ago on the Elbe, the Main and the Danube. 
It could take up to 14 days for masses of fluvial shingle and floating flood debris such as tree stumps to be removed before waterways can be declared reopened, it said.
For each inland ship left idle, the average daily cost was 1,500 euros, said the BDB. 
Losses already ran into the millions of euros. 
Especially hard hit were small, family shipping operators.


Google wants to show drivers the Waze, buys Israeli maps startup
SAN FRANCISCO -- Google, which has already outpaced all other competitors in online maps, has sealed a $1-billion-plus deal for Waze, an Israeli social mapping company that is popular with drivers who use it on mobile devices to avoid traffic congestion.
Waze had been in discussions with Facebook with which it already had a partnership and had drawn attention from other technology giants.
Instead Google could extend its lead in maps while improving their reliability and usefulness.
"The Waze product development team will remain in Israel and operate separately for now. 
We're excited about the prospect of enhancing Google Maps with some of the traffic update features provided by Waze and enhancing Waze with Google’s search capabilities," Brian McClendon, Google’s vice president of geo, said in a blog post.
The deal ends weeks of fevered speculation about the fate of the tiny but highly sought-after startup which has soared in popularity by tracking the routes of its users over GPS. 
Volunteers also submit edits to the maps to help drivers make adjustments for traffic conditions, road construction and the like.
Even though it's a crowd favorite, Waze has struggled to make money and had reached a fork in the road: Either it had to raise another round of venture funding or sell itself.
As more and more drivers rely on mobile devices to navigate the world, demand has increased for real-time traffic information. 
At its annual developers' conference last month, Google showed off a new version of its Maps product that includes more real-time traffic information, but it still has a ways to go.
Waze, McClendon said, can help drivers "outsmart" traffic.
The company is based in Israel but has an office in Palo Alto. 
It has about 100 employees and 47 million users around the world. 
It's most extensively used in Israel where nearly nine in 10 drivers deploy it, the company says. 
Joining Google could give Waze a powerful platform to preach the benefits of its products.
Financial terms were not disclosed but Google, in bidding against Facebook and Apple, is believed to have settled on a price of $1.03 billion. 
It's unclear if the deal will undergo any antitrust scrutiny.
"The big question is: Can it get through antitrust?" said Pivotal Research Group analyst Brian Wieser. 
"I expect it will be much more difficult for Google than it would have been for Facebook."
Cantor Fitzgerald analyst Youssef Squali said the deal "should help improve Google's own mapping technology and offerings, add a unique social layer that is complementary to the platform and further differentiate Google from the competition, primarily Facebook, Apple and Microsoft."
Google, he noted, has $50 billion in cash and marketable securities on hand (albeit outside the United States).
"We view this deal as strategic and potentially very valuable over time," he said in a research note.


Google wants to tell you more about the info spy agencies are seeking
SAN FRANCISCO -- Google is asking the Obama administration for permission to disclose more information about requests it gets from national intelligence agencies for its users' emails and other online communications.
The technology giant made the request in a letter to Atty. Gen. Eric H. Holder Jr. and FBI Director Robert S. Mueller III on Tuesday.
Google is trying to counteract damaging media reports that the company allows the National Security Agency access to users' online communications.
"Assertions in the press that our compliance with these requests gives the U.S. government unfettered access to our users’ data are simply untrue," Google's chief legal officer, David Drummond, said in a blog post. 
"However, government nondisclosure obligations regarding the number of FISA (Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act) national security requests that Google receives, as well as the number of accounts covered by those requests, fuel that speculation."
Google and other technology companies came under scrutiny last week after a government contractor leaked confidential documents revealing that the NSA has been receiving information from Google and other services, including data from U.S. phone call records and online communications to and from foreign targets.
Google and other companies insist that they only give up user communications when required by law, and they dispute certain details in reports in the Guardian and Washington Post newspapers that detailed their roles in an NSA data collection program called PRISM.
Google publishes a transparency report that lists the number of government requests for user data.
"We therefore ask you to help make it possible for Google to publish in our Transparency Report aggregate numbers of national security requests," Drummond wrote. 
"Google's numbers would clearly show that our compliance with these requests falls far short of the claims being made. Google has nothing to hide."
Facebook Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg said again Tuesday that Facebook does not work directly with the NSA and does not provide the federal government direct access to its systems.
"We don't work directly with the NSA or any other program in order to proactively give any user information to anyone," Zuckerberg told shareholders at the company's first annual meeting. 
"No one has ever approached us to do anything like that."
Facebook only shares "the minimum amount of information that we need to comply with the law,” Zuckerberg said.


Greece honors ex-Eurogroup chief, rules out more austerity
The Greek government has honored the former head of the Eurogroup by awarding him the country's highest order of merit for his role in the nation's bailout. 
Athens positioned itself against more austerity.
Greek Prime Minister Antonis Samaras on Tuesday awarded the former chief of the Eurogroup, Jean-Claude Juncker, with the Order of the Redeemer, pointing out the latter's role in keeping Greece in the eurozone.
"He's one of us," Samaras said, adding that Juncker had stood at the side of the Greeks throughout the protracted negotiations on how to rescue the country from bankruptcy.
During his visit to Athens, Juncker for his part said that in his former position as head of the group of eurozone finance ministers he had also made mistakes by providing "overly optimistic" assessments of Greece's ability to get back on its feet in the early stages of the bailout process.
Tough negotiations ahead
The Greek Prime Minister said Tuesday he ruled out even more austerity measures in response to the failed privatization of national gas company DEPA.
In a shock for the country's revenue-raising drive, Russian energy giant Gazprom on Monday withdrew its interest in buying the firm, leaving Athens with no serious bidder.
International auditors from the European Union, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) are back in Greece to monitor the government's endeavors to meet the savings targets set by creditors.
The lenders are expected to press Greece into fast-tracking a delayed plan to dismiss thousands of civil servants by the end of the year.
Shares at the Athens Stock Exchange suffered more heavy losses in Tuesday afternoon trading, with the benchmark index down by another 5 percent.


LDK Solar still in talks with lenders, shares fall
(Reuters) - LDK Solar Co Ltd (LDK.N) reported its eighth quarterly loss in a row and said it was still in talks with its lenders and investors to refinance its roughly $3 billion of debt, sending its shares down more than 10 percent.
LDK is one of the most heavily indebted Chinese solar companies, with a majority of its debt due next year.
The company, which said it hoped to complete its restructuring within 30 days, disclosed in April that it was in talks to refinance its debt after partially defaulting on a $24 million bond payment.
"We are working closely with our stakeholders and relevant governmental agencies to negotiate solutions," Chief Executive Xingxue Tong said in a statement on Tuesday.
LDK said important investors including China Development Bank Corp CHDB.UL were going through a restructuring proposal.
CDB and creditors of China-based banks are offering a credit facility of 2 billion yuan ($326 million), including 440 million yuan for a polysilicon plant and 1.56 billion yuan for working capital, a company executive said on a post-earnings call.
"LDK is largely dependent on getting a Beijing bailout and what happened to Suntech certainly doesn't bode well," said Raymond James analyst Alex Morris.
Bigger rival Suntech Power Holdings Co Ltd's (STP.N) Chinese lenders dragged the company's main unit into insolvency proceedings in March after it defaulted on $541 million in bonds, although it was able to strike a deal with 60 percent of the noteholders.
LDK ended the first quarter with $174.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and $168.4 million in short-term pledged bank deposits.
JOB CUTS CONTINUE
LDK said it laid off 1,677 employees in the first quarter. 
Including the job cuts disclosed on Tuesday, LDK has laid off nearly 15,000 people in the past year.
It had 8,168 employees as of March 31.
Chinese panel makers are looking to cut costs and bolster margins after a glut caused by rapid capacity expansion in China and top solar power consumer Europe's withdrawal of subsidies led to a prolonged slump in panel prices.
The company said it expected second-quarter wafer shipments of between 250 megawatts (MW) and 300 MW. 
It forecast cell and module shipments of 30 MW to 40 MW.
LDK shipped 240 MW of wafers and 31.4 MW of cells and modules in the first quarter.
The company expects its revenue to be in the range of $100 million to $150 million in the second quarter. 
Revenue nearly halved to $104.3 million in the first quarter.
LDK's net loss widened to $187.1 million, or $1.21 per American Depositary Share (ADS), from $185.2 million, or $1.46 per ADS, a year earlier.
The company's U.S.-listed shares fell to $1.46 in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange on Tuesday.


Lululemon CEO Christine Day to step down after sheer-pants scandal
Lululemon Athletica Inc.’s black yoga pants may have made a comeback after being recalled for being too sheer, but the same can’t be said for the company’s chief executive, Christine Day.
Five and a half years after taking over the helm at the Vancouver, Canada, yoga wear brand, Day will step down once a replacement is found, Lululemon said in a statement Monday.
Board members formed a search committee to find Day’s successor but decided to announce her departure to ensure “a healthy transition period,” the company said.  
The so-called Pantsgate scandal, in which Lululemon pulled all of its black yoga bottoms in March after deeming the luon fabric to be too thin, claimed Chief Product Officer Sheree Waterson’s job in April.
The company said last week that it is restocking the pants this month, this time with “more fabric across the bum so it’s not stretched from the get-go.”
The apparel accounted for 17% of the company’s sales, Lululemon said during the initial recall. 
The bottoms have since been “reengineered” to offer more coverage, the company said.
The brand also said Monday that it is plans to delist from the Toronto Stock Exchange at the close of trading June 24. 
The low trading volume of its shares “no longer justifies the expenses and administrative efforts associated” with maintaining the listing, the company said.
Lululemon also trades on Nasdaq.
The apparel seller reported earnings Monday for its fiscal first quarter ended May 5. 
Net income rose slightly to $47.3 million, or 32 cents a share, from $46.6 million, or 32 cents, during the same period a year earlier.
Sales were up 21% to $345.8 million, while same-store sales at locations open at least a year rose 7%.
The company said it expects second-quarter revenue of $340 million to $345 million and earnings per share of 33 cents to 35 cents.
Lululemon made its announcements after markets closed. 
Its shares closed up 85 cents, or 1%, at $82.28, but tumbled nearly 13% in after-hours trading not long after the disclosures.


Turkish protesters defy warning, battle police in Taksim Square
Angered by what they see as Prime Minister Erdogan's heavy hand, ousted crowds spill into the streets, adding supporters as they fight to return to the square.
ISTANBUL, Turkey — Protesters defying a blunt warning from Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan engaged in running battles Tuesday with police who unleashed clouds of tear gas and blasts of water cannons in an effort to end nearly two weeks of protest.
After daylong street battles, protesters who were chased away in the early morning swarmed back into Istanbul's central Taksim Square, which has become a focus for grievances in a country long regarded as a model of democracy and economic growth in the Muslim world.
They were met with more tear gas and water cannons, a reflection of a sharp increase in confrontations after several days of relative calm. 
By late Tuesday neither side appeared to be backing down.
Protesters angered by what they regard as Erdogan's heavy hand spilled into surrounding streets and neighborhoods, adding supporters as they fought to get back to the square. 
Erdogan, who harshly criticized former Egyptian strongman Hosni Mubarak for his crackdown on "Arab Spring" protesters in 2011, appeared intent on making good on a warning that his patience was at an end.
"Erdogan is a foolish man," said protester Osman Soybir, a civil engineer wearing swimming goggles to protect himself from the tear gas wafting from the square.
"This is not just a disappointment, it's tragic. He has too much power and he showed us today he will use it," Soybir added before another volley of tear gas sent him sprinting down the street.
Istanbul's governor, Huseyin Mutlu, said the police operation would continue until the area was cleared of protesters.
"From this moment on, the unshakable power of our state and our nation will be shown on marginal groups by our police forces," Mutlu said at a news conference.
The unrest began as a peaceful sit-in to protest plans to destroy the adjoining Gezi Park to make way for redevelopment, but it quickly swelled into nationwide demonstrations when police attempted to clear the park of demonstrators. 
Violence has also flared in other cities, notably in Izmir and the capital, Ankara. 
At least three people have died, including a police officer, and thousands have been injured, according to a doctors union.
The protesters are made up mostly of middle-class youths largely unaffiliated with any political party. 
Instead, they represent a fiercely nationalistic and secular current and feel threatened by what they see as Erdogan's authoritarianism and the ruling party's increasing focus on Islamic strictures.
Some opposition leaders, however, have joined in condemning the police crackdown.
The government's response, instead of defusing the situation, is "creating the opposite effect," Faruk Logoglu, deputy chairman of the main opposition Republican People's Party, said in a telephone interview Tuesday night. 
"On one hand the government says … we respect your democratic rights — then they attack with full force."
Erdogan, who has won three consecutive elections, has dismissed the protesters as hooligans and extremists and rejected comparisons to the Arab Spring uprisings.
Turkey's thriving multiparty democracy and vibrant economy bear little resemblance to the autocracies that ruled Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and Yemen or the current government in Syria. 
Although Erdogan may have underestimated the resolve of the protesters, he retains considerable support.
"To those who … are at Taksim and elsewhere taking part in the demonstrations with sincere feelings, I call on you to leave those places and to end these incidents, and I send you my love," Erdogan said in a televised address to members of parliament from his Justice and Development Party in Ankara.
"But for those who want to continue with the incidents I say: 'It's over.' As of now we have no tolerance for them," Erdogan was quoted as saying by the Associated Press. 
"Not only will we end the actions, we will be at the necks of the provocateurs and terrorists, and no one will get away with it."
Tuesday's violence began with a dawn raid at the square, which has seen demonstrators numbering in the tens of thousands in recent days, although just a few hundred were camped out overnight. 
Hundreds of police officers backed by armored vehicles overran improvised barricades and moved into the area, tearing down posters and banners that festooned the square.
A small group of protesters — scarves wrapped around their heads — hurled Molotov cocktails and aimed fireworks at police positioned under a revered statue in the center of Taksim Square. 
Others set a vehicle ablaze, sending plumes of smoke into the sky.
Control of the square appeared to change hands several times during the day. 
Just before the police, who had pulled back in the early evening, launched dozens of tear-gas shells about 8:30 p.m., there was a festive air among the swelling crowds of demonstrators returning to the embattled area. 
They danced, waved banners and chanted "Erdogan resign."
The tear gas sent a wave of panic through the crowd. 
Protesters ran through side streets and into cafes. 
Inside one restaurant on Istiklal Street, activists handed out lemons to combat the effects of the gas, and diners offered their drinks to the dozens crammed inside.
"We are seeing lots of injuries, mostly from head trauma, a lot of people gagging from tear gas," said a volunteer at a makeshift field hospital that was aiding protesters near Gezi Park. 
She asked to be identified only as Gizem P.
Officials initially said Tuesday morning's raid was to remove posters from the statue in Taksim Square and the nearby Ataturk Cultural Center and would not affect demonstrators assembled in Gezi Park. 
However, Interior Minister Muammer Guler later said the "intervention took place to normalize life" at the square, state media reported. 
At one point, police began marching toward the park but retreated after a brief confrontation with protesters, witnesses said.
"It was provocation," said one protester, who gave her name as Deniz A., standing in Gezi Park as tear gas hung in the air. 
"They want clashes with us, then they can portray us as the aggressors."
Erdogan defended the police operation, according to local news reports. 
"What were we supposed to do? Kneel in front of these people and ask them to remove the banners? How would those illegal rags be removed from public buildings?"
Tuesday's raid came despite reports that negotiations between the ruling Justice and Development Party and the Gezi Park movement were set to commence. 
Erdogan was expected to meet with representatives of the protesters Wednesday, though it was unclear after the nighttime clashes if the session would still be held.


What's driving unrest and protests in Turkey? 
(CNN) -- What started as a peaceful sit-in over plans to demolish a park in central Istanbul has grown to become the biggest protest movement against Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan since he was elected more than 10 years ago.
What prompted the protests?
Gezi Park sits in Istanbul's main commercial district and is the last green space in the city center. 
So, it didn't go down well with many residents when authorities announced they want to raze the park and put in its place a replica of 19th Century Ottoman barracks -- containing a shopping mall.
On Friday, a district court ordered a temporary stop to any construction. 
Mayor Kadir Topbas emphasized the park demolition was not related to the shopping mall project, but was a part of a wider renovation project of Taksim Square.
But many of the demonstrators say their anger is no longer directed against the proposed government plan. 
In Istanbul, the crowds have been chanting "Tayyip resign" -- referring to Erdogan -- and "shoulder to shoulder against fascism."
On Tuesday, the KESK confederation of public sector workers --representing 240,000 members -- called a two-day strike to protest what it called the "facism" of Erdogan's governing party.
Why did the demonstrations turn violent?
At first, the protests involved a handful of angry residents holding sit-ins. 
But the numbers quickly grew. 
Riot police moved in, lobbing tear gas and pepper spray and protesters responded by hurling bottles, blocking bulldozers and setting up barricades. 
Then, outraged by the behavior of security forces, demonstrators began attacking police.
International human rights groups Amnesty International and Greenpeace have denounced what they describe as the excessive use of police force against peaceful protesters.
A spokesman for European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton issued a statement that said Ashton "regrets disproportionate use of force by members of the Turkish police." 
Ashton also called for talks between the two sides.
Erdogan conceded Saturday that Turkish security forces had made excessive use of tear gas against demonstrators.
"There have been errors in the actions of the security forces, especially with regard to use of pepper gas. Right now that is being investigated, researched," he said.
"There is an error there, sure. When it is used excessively we are against it as well. And in fact there was such excess."
However, on Monday, Erdogan dismissed allegations that security forces used excessive force, and denied that Turkey could be on the cusp of its own "Arab Spring." 
"We are servants of the people, not masters. We did not use violence," he said before leaving for a four-day trip to North Africa.
On Tuesday, Turkey's semi-official news agency Andalou quoted Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arinc as saying the country's security and intelligence forces were working to prevent the escalation of violence.
"They are doing a hard job. When they are executing their jobs, they may sometimes use extraordinary even excessive use of force. But they wait in a passive mode unless something comes from the other side," Arinc said. 
He said security forces had been ordered to only use gas in self-defense.
How widespread are the protests?
Since Friday, there have been protests in 67 of Turkey's 81 provinces, according to Andalou. 
There have been reports of confrontations in the capital, Ankara, as well as the port cities of Izmir and Adana.
The Turkish Medical Association claimed that at least 3,195 people had been injured in clashes Sunday and Monday. 
Only 26 of them were in serious or critical condition, it said.
One protester, Mehmet Ayvalitas, died of his injuries, the association said. 
And the governor of Hatay in southeastern Turkey said that a 22-year-old man, Abdulah Comert, was killed with a firearm by unknown suspects during demonstrations late Monday, Andalou reported.
More than 700 people have been detained since Tuesday last week, and most have been released, it said.
Why do the protesters want Erdogan to step down?
The police crackdown on the park demonstrators set off the wider unrest. 
Now, the scope of the protests shows there is a bigger issue, about freedom of speech and accusations of heavy-handed government, at stake.
Elected to power than a decade ago, Erdogan is the most powerful and popular politician Turkey has seen in generations, but his approach to leadership doesn't sit well with all Turks, said Asli Aydintasbas, a columnist for Milliyet Newspaper.
"We have a prime minister who has done great deeds and he really has run the economy well," she said. 
"But you also have this paternalistic style: 'I know what's good for you. I, as your father, can decide on the park, the bridge, the city and the constitution.' So, I think people are just wanting to have a more inclusive form of democracy in Turkey."
Tuncay, a 28-year-old demonstrator, told CNN on Saturday. 
"The Erdogan government is usually considered as authoritarian. He has a big ego; he has this Napoleon syndrome. He takes himself as a sultan... He needs to stop doing that. He's just a prime minister."
How has Erdogan reacted?
A defiant Erdogan shows no inclination to give in to protesters' demands.
On Monday, Erdogan said: "Those in Turkey who speak of the Turkish Spring are right; the season is, in fact, spring," he said. 
"But there are those trying to turn it into a winter."
He said opponents who had failed to defeat his party in elections were trying to beat it "by other means." 
"The issue of trees in Gezi Park thing is just the trigger," he said.
Fadi Hakura, associate fellow and manager of the Turkey Project at London-based think-tank Chatham House, said demonstrations were not equivalent to the uprisings that led to the toppling of other Arab leaders two years ago.
"Unlike Egypt and other Arab countries, Turkey is a functioning, albeit incomplete, democracy and has been since 1950," he said.
"Erdogan received a resounding mandate of almost half the vote in the last general elections in 2011. He still remains the most popular politician in Turkey, while the opposition is widely seen by many Turks as weak and ineffective."
Hakura said the protests coincided with a "rapidly slowing economy" and "the ultimate determinant of Erdogan's staying power will be the state of the Turkish economy rather than anti-government demonstrations."
So is Erdogan authoritarian?
In November 2012, Erdogan won leadership of his Justice and Development Party, or AKP, for the third time, reaching the party's term limit.
However, the AKP's internal constitution was amended during the party congress to allow parliamentarians who have already served three terms -- such as Erdogan -- to be re-elected after sitting out an election cycle.
"One of the most important aspects of the convention was the message that the prime minister is not going anywhere," Suat Kiniklioglu, a former AKP parliamentarian and director of the Strategic Communication Center based in Ankara, wrote in an e-mail to CNN at the time.
"Instead he will try to become a president who can maintain his party affiliation, or will try to change the system into a presidential or semi-presidential system," he said.
Has religion played any role in the unrest?
Hakura says the protests partially reflect "the deep ideological polarization between secular, liberal-minded Turks, and the more religious Turks."
The modern Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923 by Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who instituted secular laws to replace traditional religious orders.
"Secular Turks complain that the Islamist-rooted government is intolerant of criticism and the diversity of lifestyles," he says and "so far, Erdogan's robust and muscular stance vis-à-vis the demonstrators has reinforced those perceptions."
Erdogan describes his AKP party as a "conservative democratic" party but some fear the AKP's conservative Islamic values are encroaching on Turkey's traditional secularism.
Writing for Hurriyet Daily News, Yusuf Kanli said an "arrogant" Erdogan had taken a series of wrong steps ahead of the protests, including passing legislation that placed additional restrictions on the sale and consumption of alcohol.
Erdogan had referred to "two boozers" who had introduced liberal alcohol laws, Kanli said.
"That was an obvious reference to Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the diehard secular founding father of the republic, and his comrade in arms and second president Ismet Inonu," he wrote.
Culture wars frequently pit Turkey's ruling Muslim elite against more secular segments of Turkish society.
The AKP narrowly avoided being banned from politics in 2008 when it was fined by the country's constitutional court for alleged anti-secular activities. 
The court has also blocked legislation to lift a ban on Islamic headscarves at public universities.
Last month, there was an outcry in social media and newspaper columns when Turkish Airlines -- which is 49% government-owned -- announced it was banning certain shades of lipstick and nail polish among flight attendants.
A similar uproar had ensued when the company announced it would stop serving alcohol on a number of domestic and international routes.
Do Turks have freedom of speech?
On June 3, the Committee to Protect Journalists quoted news accounts and local journalists as saying the press had "come under fire from both government officials and protesters" during the demonstrations.
It referred to criticism of social media and news outlets by Erdogan, saying "when top government officials make anti-media statements, hostility against journalists is interpreted as allowed, even approved," and urged him to publicly denounce violence against journalists.
In 2012, the organization said there were 49 imprisoned journalists in Turkey, making it one of the world's "worst jailers of the press," alongside Iran and China.
Last month, Emma Sinclair-Webb, from Human Rights Watch, said that one of Turkey's "most fundamental human rights problems is in fact intolerance of free speech."
"Politicians regularly sue journalists for defamation. Editors and publishers are mostly unwilling to permit much criticism of the government for fear of harming their bosses' other business interests," Sinclair-Webb said.
"The European Court of Human Rights has found over and over that Turkey has violated free speech. But prosecutors, courts, and government figures are still applying different standards to Turkey, muzzling views they don't want to hear," she said.
Turkey applied to join the European Union in 1987. 
In a 2012 progress report, The European Commission said "important reforms are needed to strengthen human rights structures and the number of criminal proceedings brought against human rights defenders is a matter of concern."
It said an increase in violations of freedom of expression also raised "serious concerns" with "pressure on the press by state officials and the firing of critical journalists" leading to widespread self-censorship.
In a statement on its website, Turkey's Ministry of Foreign Affairs says promotion and protection of human rights are "among the priority policy objectives of Turkey."
"In this regard, Turkey has been going through a comprehensive reform process in recent years with a view to further strengthening democracy, consolidating the rule of law and ensuring respect for fundamental rights and freedoms."
Erdogan's chief adviser, Ibrahim Kalin, said Saturday that the protesters had a right to express their discontent, within limits.
"People are entitled to disagreement with the government; they can exercise their democratic rights, but they can do so within the context of a democratic society," he said.
Is it safe to visit Turkey at the moment?
Britain's Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) has advised British nationals to avoid all demonstrations "following recent demonstrations in Istanbul and other cities in Turkey in which police used tear gas and water cannons," but it has not told its citizens to avoid travel to Istanbul.
The U.S. has also warned its citizens to beware of demonstrations, in Turkey, which is one of Washington's key allies in the Middle East. 
"U.S. citizens traveling or residing in Turkey should be alert to the potential for violence, avoid those areas where disturbances have occurred, and avoid demonstrations and large gatherings."
Australia advised its citizens to "avoid protests and demonstrations throughout Turkey as they may become violent."
Meantime, war-torn Syria has warned its citizens not to visit its neighbor.
''The Foreign and Expatriates Ministry advises the Syrian citizens against traveling to Turkey during this period for fear for their safety, due to the security conditions in some Turkish cities that have deteriorated over the past days and the violence practiced by Erdogan's government against peaceful protesters," it said in a statement Sunday.


Protests in Turkey bring a reckoning to Prime Minister Erdogan
Recep Tayyip Erdogan's Islam-democracy blend may be too restrictive for the secularists, activists and even working-class mothers protesting in Taksim Square.
ISTANBUL, Turkey — With swagger and grand designs, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan rose to power more than a decade ago, heralding a new Islamist-based democracy he envisioned as a model for a Muslim world caught in the grip of autocrats, kings and despots.
But more than two weeks of protest against Erdogan's increasingly authoritarian rule have brought a reckoning to a leader who, despite his political astuteness, has miscalculated the fervor from a large part of an electorate opposed to the creeping religious conservatism of his Justice and Development Party, or AKP.
Erdogan is still very much in control, and few would venture that the crisis will bring him down, but the protests have hurt him politically and exposed misgivings within his party. 
Tear gas and water cannons have damaged Turkey's international image, upsetting the stock market and giving investors pause at a time when the once hyper-speed economy has slowed to about 3% annual growth.
The unrest also suggests that his blend of Islam and democracy is too restrictive for secularists, artists, activists and even working-class mothers who have turned out in Istanbul's central Taksim Square. 
Like Egypt's Tahrir Square two years ago, it has been transformed into an iconic, scorched patch of rebellion.
"Erdogan's vulnerability now is the secular middle classes that have risen against AKP governance. And that genie will not go back into the bottle," said Soner Cagaptay, director of the Turkish Research Program at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. 
"This is a new dynamic in Turkish politics and this will challenge him on his urban renewal and foreign policy programs. So far, he has had an easy ride."
But the crisis is "not defining in the sense that Erdogan and the AKP will lose elections or that there will be a fundamental shift in the balance of power," said Shadi Hamid, director of research at the Brookings Doha Center. 
"There is no obvious take away from these protests of the sort we saw in Egypt and Tunisia."
He said, however, that demonstrations "put a real wrench in Erdogan's plans in revising the constitution and perhaps plans to run for the presidency."
But Erdogan has a sizable base and can point to leading Turkey through 10 years of economic growth and political stability even as his government, at times quietly, persecuted journalists, human rights activists and others. 
Yet many question his support of rebels seeking to overthrow the government in neighboring Syria and his social policies that include a push to restrict alcohol sales.
Erdogan on Wednesday met with some demonstrators to try to ease the tension. 
But the movement's key activists were not invited. 
Turkish media reported that more than 1,000 lawyers rallied outside a courthouse to criticize the arrest of about 50 of their colleagues a day earlier. 
By nightfall, protesters were gathering in Gezi Park, which adjoins the Taksim, as police forces mobilized after Erdogan promised protests would end within 24 hours.
Doctors said at least 2,500 people were injured — including 130 shot by plastic bullets — Tuesday when police stormed the square and forced out protesters amid exchanges of tear gas and Molotov cocktails. 
The demonstrations, which began last month over Erdogan's plans to develop Gezi Park, have erupted into one of the most serious crises of his career.
"I am hopeful that we will surmount this through democratic maturity," President Abdullah Gul told reporters. 
"If they have objections, we need to hear them, enter into a dialogue. It is our duty to lend them an ear."
Turkish news reports said Wednesday night that an AKP official said the government might consider holding a referendum on development in the park. 
Such a move would mark Erdogan's most significant gesture to defuse the crisis.
The prime minister has offered to scrap a proposed shopping center in the park but he plans to build a replica of an Ottoman-era barracks and possibly a mosque and opera house. 
Many Turks also have been infuriated by Erdogan's naming of a new bridge over the Bosporus in Istanbul after an Ottoman sultan accused by the nation's Alevi minority of massacring many of its sect.
But Erdogan appears aloof to the wider passions of those against him, many of them young and without political allegiances. 
Erdogan, who sold sesame buns as a boy on Istanbul's tough streets and as a politician outflanked Turkey's powerful military, has called the protesters "bums" and unleashed police violence against them.
"What is most worrying for me though is the way both Erdogan, his government and his supporters have interpreted the protests: A conspiracy orchestrated by 'dark powers that want to halt Turkey's progress,'" Mustafa Akyol, a columnist, wrote in Hurriyet Daily News. 
"In the pro-Erdogan media, this conspiratorial interpretation of the events has been taken to new, and more absurd, levels."
Similar conspiracy theories were voiced by falling autocrats during the Arab uprisings two years ago. 
Erdogan vilified those leaders for suppressing civil freedoms but he has acted like them in countering his own opposition. 
His style and his determination to stay in power have drawn comparisons to Russian President Vladimir Putin, who over the years has switched job titles but has remained his country's ultimate authority.
"Erdogan has ambitions of continuing his domination of Turkish politics by 'pulling a Putin' and engineering a transition to a presidential system that he would head," said Howard Eissenstat, an expert on Turkey in the department of history at St. Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y.
"Resistance within the party to this is likely to be much higher after his bumbling performance this past two weeks," he said. 
"In particular, the crackdown seems to be exacerbating the fracture between him and the wing of the party associated" with the Islamist movement led by Fethullah Gulen, a prominent Muslim intellectual who lives in Pennsylvania and advocates religious tolerance.
Erdogan's moderate and conservative Islamist supporters, especially those in the provinces, do not want his religious agenda and echoes of Ottoman grandeur to be jeopardized by an uproar from liberal sectors.
"He might lose the battle but win the war," said Cagaptay. 
"Half of Turks still support the AKP, and he can consolidate this base to be united against liberals.... He can bring the AKP camps together."
But — as has been apparent in Taksim Square over the last two weeks — Turkey is in the midst of a collision of ideals that so far Erdogan has been unable to calm.
"I feel like I am in a horror movie," said Havva Dogan, who picked up cigarette butts and rubbish in Gezi Park early Wednesday afternoon, cheap rubber gloves on her hands, a gas mask hanging from her neck. 
"Erdogan is a dictator. He is not only showing his power, but he's sending us a message: You have no rights."


Turkey's Erdogan: Successful leader or 'dictator'?
(CNN) -- He's perhaps the most powerful and popular politician Turkey has seen in generations. 
But Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan may also be the most polarizing.
And now, the man who boasts economic and political accomplishments during 10 years in office is fending off complaints from large crowds of protesters that he's turning into a "dictator."
"The only thing that we want," said one of the thousands packed into anti-government demonstrations in Istanbul, "... we want him to resign."
The editorial board of The Washington Post said Erdogan "is offering unfortunate proof that it is possible to be both elected and authoritarian."
His accomplishments in office include unprecedented economic growth in Turkey.
"Erdogan has been a key part of that success. He has vision, drive, and his supporters united around him and push for the agenda he is building," said Tim Ash, head of emerging markets for Standard Bank.
The prime minister has also spearheaded political reforms that brought Turkey more in line with the European Union -- and closer to the West.
Under Erdogan and his ruling AKP party, Turkey lifted curbs on public expression of religion, including strict limits on women wearing Islamic-style headscarves. 
And he's made significant progress in ending the 30 years of guerrilla war with Kurdish separatists.
Erdogan is an important ally of the United States and President Barack Obama, and a key political player in efforts to resolve the crisis in Syria.
But along the way, critics say, he has steadily accumulated more and more power and shown growing intolerance of dissent.
With his term set to end next year, Erdogan has repeatedly announced plans to transform the country's political system from a prime ministerial form of government to a more powerful presidential system, with himself as head of state.
Many journalists say press freedoms in Turkey have declined under his rule. 
Reporters Without Borders says Turkey "is currently the world's biggest prison for journalists, especially those who express views critical of the authorities on the Kurdish issue."
Erdogan rejects the accusations against him.
"I have nothing to say if they call the person who has committed himself to serving his nation a dictator," Erdogan said in a televised address.
Demonstrators say otherwise. 
"He has a big ego; he has this Napoleon syndrome. He takes himself as a sultan," said Yakup Efe Tuncay, a 28-year-old demonstrator who carried a Turkish flag in Gezi Park, ground zero for the protest movement.
"He needs to stop doing that. He's just a prime minister."
Others have different complaints about Erdogan.
Many secular Turks complain that the Islamist-rooted government is intolerant of criticism and diverse lifestyles, as evidenced by the recent enactment of tight restrictions on the sale of alcohol, Fadi Hakura, manager of the Turkey Project at the London-based think tank Chatham House, said in a CNN.com column.
Critics also complain about rapid urbanization and its effects on the environment, an issue that helped spark the initial protests in Gezi Park.
Erdogan has made clear he expects to hold on to power. 
The protests, he says, will not prove to be a "Turkish Spring," a reference to the Arab Spring that brought regime changes in several nations.
Staunch supporters continue to stand by him.
"He's a man's man," said Cengizhan Safi, a resident of Kasimpasa, the Istanbul neighborhood that Erdogan grew up in. 
"We love him a lot because he's a Muslim Turk and because he's from Kasimpasa."
Safi added that he and others don't take the protesters seriously. 
"Because they are the minority. We are already the owners of this country."
Erdogan has said that if he wanted to mobilize his supporters on the streets, he could bring out huge crowds. 
But many in the region speculate that he's losing support.
As such suggestions have surfaced on social media, Erdogan slammed Twitter for helping people spread "lies." 
Social media, he said, "is the worst menace to society.''
While it's unclear how the protests will affect his future, he's not new to being the subject of controversy.
In a 2011 online poll fueled by Turkish social media sites, more people picked Erdogan to be Time's Person of the Year than any other candidate. 
But at the same time, more people voted against the idea than for it.
As Time put it, Erdogan was simultaneously the poll's "most- and least-favored Person of the Year."


Peking to Paris Rally Briton killed in Siberia car crash
A British woman has been killed in a car crash in Siberia while taking part in the Peking to Paris Rally for vintage cars, officials have said.
Mother-of-two Emma Wilkinson, 46, from Kettering in Northamptonshire, was killed when a Volkswagen Polo collided head on with her 1970 Chevrolet C10 near the city of Tyumen on Wednesday.
A man and a baby in the other vehicle were also killed.
Russian police said they were investigating the incident.
Ms Wilkinson had been driving from Omsk to Tyumen on a federal highway, and was travelling with her partner and co-driver Peter Davies, when the crash happened, the Endurance Rally Association said.
The couple were driving to the next check point in the rally at the time of the crash but were not taking part in a time trial, a spokeswoman said.
They were into the third week of the 33-day race.
'Head-on crash'
"The Tyumen region police reported that the incident was a head-on crash between the British driver's Chevrolet and a Volkswagen Polo. 
They added the Polo's passengers, a 31-year-old man and a baby, died, while a woman is in intensive care in hospital," the organisers said in a statement.
Mr Davies was not seriously injured.
The spokeswoman said: "They weren't in an area where they had to do the fastest time, they were on a normal highway.
"Emma was in no hurry as the section she was driving was an easy main road and her target schedule was 30 mph."
She said the police were investigating eyewitness reports that the driver of the Polo had "fallen asleep at the wheel moments before careering across the road into the path of the oncoming Chevrolet".
"There were no skid marks and traffic was very light," she said.
The BBC's Moscow correspondent, Daniel Sandford, said the long and poorly-maintained stretch of road was notorious for car accidents and is described locally as "the road of death".
The Peking (Beijing) to Paris Rally is said to be one of the toughest vintage car races in the world, covering 7,000 miles (11,000km).
Participants travel in classic cars leaving from Beijing and travelling across the Gobi Desert, through Mongolia and Russia, and then on through Europe to Paris.
The rally takes place in stages, some of which are competitive time trials.
It is the fifth time it has been held.
'Lively and popular'
Rally director Philip Young said: "Emma was a fun loving, lively and popular member of the rally.
"In the three weeks we've been together both she and Peter proved themselves to be capable, competent and resourceful. 
"Their 1970 Chevrolet C10 pickup was a remarkable sight in the Mongolian wilderness and today our thoughts and sympathies are with Emma's family and friends, including her two brothers Robert and Mark who are also participating."
The organisers' team in Russia and the UK rally office is working with local police, the Foreign Office and the British Embassy to offer the family assistance, the organisers' statement said.
A Foreign Office spokesman said: "We are aware of the death of a British national in Russia on 12 June.
"We stand ready to provide consular assistance to the family at this difficult time."


Flights canceled as French air traffic controllers strike
(CNN) -- Thousands of travelers face disruption and canceled flights Wednesday as French air traffic controllers go on strike for a second day over a European Union plan to update rules governing European airspace.
About half the scheduled flights at Paris' Charles de Gaulle Airport have been canceled because of the strike, the airport said.
There are usually about 600 flights a day from the airport at this time of year, it said. 
Short and medium-haul flights are those most affected for the 200 airlines that operate out of the airport.
About 2,000 flights across Europe were canceled Tuesday, the first day of the strike, the air traffic agency Eurocontrol said.
The strike has led to the cancellation of 27 flights Wednesday from London's Heathrow Airport -- 14 arriving and 13 departing, the airport said.
Most of the flights were going either to or from Charles De Gaulle, Toulouse and Marseille airports, it said.
EasyJet said 66 flights to or from the United Kingdom had been canceled Wednesday.
"These are largely contained to France and Spain although other destinations may be affected" by the resulting delays, it said in a statement.
Travelers are encouraged to check with EasyJet for updates, particularly if they are flying to or from France, Spain and Portugal.
"EasyJet is contacting customers affected by cancellations, and those passengers will be entitled to a refund or to book an alternative flight," the airline said.
A spokeswoman for Charles de Gaulle Airport said it hopes to return to normal service Thursday when the strike is due to end.
The European Transport Workers' Federation said air traffic workers in 11 European countries were taking action Wednesday to voice their opposition to plans involving a single European airspace.
Air traffic controllers are on strike only in France and Hungary, however, with other action including gatherings and walkouts, said Francois Ballestero, the union's political secretary.
The union's action follows the European Commission's adoption Tuesday of a new package on the "Single European Sky," it said.
It believes the package, known as SES2+, would jeopardize jobs and put cost savings and competitiveness ahead of safety considerations.
The European Commission says EU rules on air traffic management must be updated to boost performance and improve oversight, otherwise predicted increases in air traffic will cause major delays.
It said the new rules would mean lower costs for airlines and more direct routes, which would help keep ticket prices down for travelers, while helping airlines return to profit. 
Shorter routes and fewer delays would also mean lower greenhouse-gas emissions, it said.
The Single European Sky program was first launched in 2004 to improve coordination between the 27 member states' air traffic authorities and cut delays.


Bike makes riders high-flyers, if only for five minutes
WATCH: Electric bike takes to the skies
Flying cars are yet to take off - could bikes have a better chance?
Researchers in the Czech Republic have unveiled a 95kg (210lb) remotely-controlled bicycle that can hover a few metres above ground for five minutes.
Carrying a dummy rider, the electric prototype successfully took off, flew around and landed inside an exhibition hall in Prague.
The bike is powered by two battery-run propellers on the front, two on the back and one on each side.
The machine could help two-wheeled commuters avoid zigzagging through traffic jams - but it is not quite ready to hit the road - or the air above it - just yet.
The batteries only allow for a few minutes of flight before needing to be re-charged.
"Because the capacity of batteries doubles about every 10 years, we can expect that in the future the capacity would be enough for the bike to used for sports, tourism or similar things," said the technical director of Duratec Bicycles, Milan Duchek.
To create the bike, Duratec worked together with two other Czech firms, Technodat and Evektor.
Bikes with parachutes
It is not the first attempt to make a bicycle fly.
In August 2009, an IT teacher John Carver from Oxfordshire constructed what he called the "Flyke" - a flying tricycle - and flew it across the UK, from Lands End to John o'Groats, for charity.
Registered with the Civil Aviation Authority, Mr Carver's machine is powered by a two-stroke twin propeller motor with a paraglider canopy and is equipped with a parachute, always open when the bike is in the air.
The bike has to be refuelled about every two hours, is able to carry up to 25.4kg (56lb) of luggage, and can reach a flying speed of about 32km/h (20mph). According to Mr Carver's website, the device is now for sale.
Companies such as Para-Cycle sell similar devices as well, but a huge parachute may prove cumbersome for the city commuter.
And in the early 20th Century, among the very first "flying machines" were bicycles with wings attached to the frame - what became known as aviettes.
They did not really fly, but rather hopped above ground, or glided, having been first powered by fierce pedalling.


Boateng's protest: Year Zero in football's fight against racism?
The "World Sport presents: Racism in Football" documentary will first screen on CNN International on Saturday June 15. 
It investigates whether the "beautiful game" can eradicate one of its biggest problems. 
(CNN) -- "I learned that courage was not the absence of fear, but the triumph over it. 
The brave man is not he who does not feel afraid, but he who conquers that fear." Nelson Mandela
For Kevin-Prince Boateng it was a depressingly familiar soundtrack: the monkey noises, the name-calling, the crude racial stereotyping.
He'd always ignored it in the past, and for 25 minutes of AC Milan's match with lower league Pro Patria in early January this year he'd done the same.
But then something inside him snapped. 
The 26-year-old picked up the ball and propelled it in the direction of his abusers before storming from the field of play, followed by his teammates.
The game was over and Boateng's protest transformed this exhibition match into headline news around the globe, plunging football's authorities into crisis management mode.
"I could hear from the crowd some monkey noises and this went on for about 25 minutes. Every time I touched the ball I could hear the crowd," Boateng told CNN.
"I said to myself, in this kind of environment, in this situation, I don't want to play football anymore."
"I came to the dressing room and I was the first, and saw one (teammate), then the second one and then the whole team came. I was really surprised and then really proud. I thanked all of them for following me."
"After not even 10 minutes I had, like, 86 phone calls on my phone and I thought something had happened, but it was just an unbelievable impact. It went all around the world within the first hour."
The authorities react
Boateng's actions were applauded and condemned in equal measure but, undeniably, they forced the game's authorities to stand up and take notice.
As recently as 2011 FIFA president Sepp Blatter told CNN that on-field racism didn't exist in football and that those who thought they'd been abused during a game should simply shake hands upon the final whistle and move on.
He later insisted his comments had been misinterpreted and underlined his commitment to fighting racism in football and society.
But while Blatter insisted that walking off the field was the wrong way to tackle discrimination, there's no doubt Boateng's protest provoked the head of world soccer's governing body into decisive action.
A task force against racism and discrimination was formed, with Boateng invited to join ahead of its first meeting on May 6.
It formulated proposals that would see any player or official found guilty of racism banned for five matches while teams could be docked points, expelled from competition or even relegated for persistent offenses.
Those recommendations were ratified at FIFA's recent congress in Mauritius and were hailed by the task force's head Jeffrey Webb as a "defining moment" in soccer's fight against racism.
Boateng was also invited to the United Nations, where he told the International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination that racism was a "dangerous disease."
UEFA, European football's governing body, went further than FIFA, implementing a minimum 10-match ban for racist abuse by players or officials and escalating measures for clubs including fines and stadium closures for repeat offenders.
But although football's authorities have now adopted a stronger stance to combat what has long been an ugly stain on the game, the picture on the ground is more clouded.
CNN contacted more than 15 European football associations asking a series of questions on the prevalence of racism.
One of only a handful who replied, the Portuguese FA, said they don't have any record of racist abuse cases in their country.
This despite Porto being fined $26,000 by UEFA for racist abuse directed at Mario Balotelli, then a Manchester City player, during a Europa League match in 2012.
The English club was later fined $39,000 in the same competition for taking to the field late after halftime.
On the ground in Serbia
The situation in Serbia reflects the complex nature of such an explosive topic.
The technical director of the Serbian Football Association, Savo Milosevic, told CNN that his country's problems with racism have been exaggerated.
"I think people made out of this a much bigger problem than we actually have," he said. 
"We don't have a strategy to fight against racism in the FA of Serbia, we also don't have a strategy in our government to fight against racism, simply because we don't consider this a problem here."
He cited the difficulties they face with crowd violence as a more pressing concern, with Serbia repeatedly warned about the conduct of its supporters, who rioted and caused a Euro 2012 qualifying game with Italy to be abandoned back in 2010.
But the Serbian FA was recently fined £65,000 ($84,000) by UEFA after an ill-tempered under-21 match against England in which visiting player Danny Rose claimed he'd been subjected to monkey chants from the crowd.
The incident, and the fine, prompted criticism of UEFA from the British government, whose sports minister Hugh Robertson expressed his disappointment at the sanctions in relation to what he called "widespread racist abuse."
Milosevic, just like the Serbian FA did at the time, insisted the punishment was related to a brawl between the players and not to do with racism.
Passionate fans
On CNN's visit to the Belgrade derby between Partizan and Red Star, notorious for the fervency of both sets of fans, there was violence in the stands, and several fires lit but no audible racism.
Reflecting the diverse nature of many playing squads within European football, Red Star's team contained several black players who told CNN they'd experienced no racial abuse since joining the club.
But while progress has been made on the field, with players from a wide range of nationalities sharing dressing rooms around Europe and standing together to present a united front against the scourge of discrimination, flashpoints keep occurring in the stands, especially in Italy.
Lazio was issued with a $186,000 fine after racist chanting from its fans during three matches in the Europa League: two against English club Tottenham in September and November 2012, and one against Maribor of Slovenia in December.
And in May, Boateng, along with Italy striker Mario Balotelli and Ghana international Sulley Muntari, were the targets when a game between AC Milan and Roma was temporarily halted as visiting fans chanted racist abuse at the trio.
Balotelli, one of Europe's most high-profile black players, told CNN in an exclusive interview that he would walk off the field if the abuse persisted while Muntari expressed his desire to "kill" all racism in the game.
They epitomized a new resolve among the game's top players to stamp out discrimination, sparked by Boateng's actions in the small town of Busto Arsizio in the Lombardy region of the country on that January afternoon.
Boateng's resolve
His abusers at Pro Patria were recently handed jail sentences ranging from 40 days to two months and Boateng is convinced the past five months are proof that there is hope for the future.
"I'm taking care of these things because I want my son to grow up in a nice place and not in a place where he has to be confronted by racism," Boateng explained to CNN.
"But I never ever thought that if something happened like this that I would react the way I did, that was just out of the emotion and anger in that situation.
"I would say that it's there every day. It's still there and that's a big problem, because we are in the year 2013 and we still have to face racism. There are so many people who are fighting it now, and I want to be a part of that.
"I'm very confident. I had so many talks and so much support from people who want to help, who have offered their help."
After years of mixed messages from the top, it appears there is now an appetite to launch an assault on the outdated attitudes that still infiltrate the modern game.
But given the recent resurgence of racist incidents in Europe, and the muddled picture in various pockets of the continent, the path towards zero tolerance is sure to prove painstaking.
Should the globe's most popular sport manage to forge a way through, perhaps it will be able to point to the events of January 3 as a turning point.
As far as Boateng is concerned, had it been a friendly, or one of the planet's most high-profile games his reaction would have been the same.
"I think we should not accept and tolerate racism anywhere, in any game, whether it's a friendly game or a World Cup final or it's a Champions League final," he said.
"For me I would honestly do it even if it was a Champions League final."


Greek unions join protests after state broadcaster taken off air
Athens, Greece (CNN) -- Greek workers rallied in central Athens on Thursday after unions called a general strike to protest the government's sudden decision to halt activities at the country's state broadcaster.
Thousands gathered outside the headquarters of the broadcaster, ERT, whose TV channels and radio services were pulled off the air overnight Tuesday to Wednesday.
Government officials are defending the decision as a necessary budget-cutting move as the country struggles with a debt mountain, soaring unemployment and a lengthy recession.
There was more bad news Thursday, as new figures showed the unemployment rate was up again.
Overall unemployment reached 27.4% in the first quarter of 2013, according to the Greek Statistics Agency, up from 26% in the last quarter of 2012, and 22.6% a year ago.
The strike action has affected all public transportation in the capital and will likely disrupt flights in the afternoon, when air traffic controllers will hold a two-hour stoppage (8-10 a.m. ET).
The sudden shutdown of ERT has prompted fear among many Greeks that other public sector employers could be next.
Inside the ERT building, where some journalists are still broadcasting via the Internet, the mood is grim.
"We are in a state of shock. The news is overwhelming," Rena Dimitriou, on the foreign desk, told CNN. 
"We feel insulted by our government, by our prime minister."
"We feel angry and we feel that we are being terrorized by our government ... For me personally I feel lost, but in a case that is not lost. I've been working here for 21 years now and it feels as if my life has reached a dead end. It means a new beginning but I don't know how this will be possible."
"Also I feel embarrassed. Profound dismay. Right now thousands of people don't know what comes next. And all this overnight."
Dimitriou is also concerned about the impact on the Greek diaspora and those living in border areas, "who have now lost their connection with the motherland" and must rely on privately owned media for news.
'No prospects'
In the newsroom, journalists who would normally have been working on broadcasts are turning their hands to sweeping, cleaning up and, they say, making sure that public property is not destroyed.
Zeta Kontaxi, who has worked at ERT for 19 years, said she never expected to see the events of the past two days -- and she fears for the future.
"Being here for 19 years is part of my existence and suddenly this comes to a grinding halt overnight," she said. 
"We already had a 38% salary cut since 2010, so I have used all of my savings and now I find myself in a situation with no money and no job and no prospects of employment, when unemployment figures in Greece stand at 27%."
Meanwhile, the number of protesters outside the ERT headquarters continued to swell Thursday morning.
Among them was Giorgos Louvrikos, a 21-year-old law student from Patras who is studying in Athens.
"What the government has done is no better that what Erdogan is doing in Turkey. Suppressing people's voices," he said, referring to the crackdown on protests in Istanbul and elsewhere.
Prime Minister Antonis Samaras described ERT Wednesday as a "symbol of waste and lack of transparency" that needed to be changed.
But the General Confederation of Greek Workers and the Civil Servants Confederation oppose the decision and called for industrial action through the day Thursday.
Thousands also joined a peaceful protest Wednesday outside ERT's Athens headquarters. 
Many were employees, but others were ordinary Greeks who turned out in a show of support.
Some held banners that read, "All in the streets," urging fellow Greeks to join their cause.
No room for 'sacred cows'
Government spokesman Simon Kedikoglou cited chronic corruption and mismanagement of funds as reasons why the broadcaster was closed down, at least temporarily.
"At a time when the Greek people are enduring sacrifices, there is no room for delay, hesitation or tolerance for sacred cows," Kedikoglou said in announcement shown on the broadcaster.
ERT has said the decision means 2,656 employees will lose their jobs.
To meet its commitments to its creditors -- the European Commission, European Central Bank and International Monetary Fund -- the Greek government has to dismiss 2,000 people from the wider public sector by the end of the year and 15,000 by the end of 2014.
Kedikoglou said a new television and radio broadcaster would open with a much smaller staff, with existing employees able to apply for new positions.
A "modern television and radio broadcaster will be established that will operate as soon as possible," he said.
An exact time frame for the new organization has not been announced, but a government spokesman said the new broadcaster should be operational before the end of the summer.
The General Secretariat of Information and Communication said the new state broadcaster would be called the Organization of Modern State Television.
Journalists dismayed
The European Commission said Wednesday it had not sought the closure of ERT, "but nor does the Commission question the Greek Government's mandate to manage the public sector."
It added that the commission "supports the role of public broadcasting as an integral part of European democracy."
Reporters Without Borders expressed dismay over what it said was a "bizarre" decision by the government to shut down ERT's activities while carrying out the overhaul of its services.
"Greece has fallen almost 50 places in the past three years in the Reporters Without Borders press freedom index, a record fall in such a short period for a European Union member state," a statement said.
"The reasons include violence against reporters covering anti-austerity demonstrations, which goes completely unpunished, and threats against journalists and other news providers by the Golden Dawn party's neo-Nazis.
"Against this backdrop, the closure of ERT's TV stations has dealt a devastating blow to pluralism and freedom of information in Greece."
Greek lawmakers agreed in April to cut thousands of government workers to secure another 8.8 billion euros ($11.5 billion) in international bailout funds.


ERT closure: Greek unions stage 24-hour protest strike
Many of Greece's public services are in disarray because of a general strike in protest at the government's surprise move to shut down state broadcaster ERT with the loss of nearly 2,700 jobs.
The 24-hour strike, which includes Greek media, began at midnight (21:00 GMT).
Marches under way in Athens are due to converge outside ERT's offices.
Prime Minister Antonis Samaras insists ERT was a "symbol of waste and lack of transparency".
The measure is designed to help Greece meet its debt bailout obligations.
The resulting general strike, which is the third this year, is affecting government offices, schools and hospitals.
Public transport hit
It also means buses, trams, ferries and trains are not running, with no metro service to Athens' main airport.
Air traffic controllers are due to stage a two-hour walk-out starting at 1200 GMT.
ERT journalists are staging defiant sit-ins in the capital and in Greece's second city, Thessaloniki.
The government says riot police are stationed outside ERT offices to prevent "any destruction". 
Most of the broadcaster's output has been taken off air since Tuesday, although shortwave radio and internet broadcasts continue.
Journalists across all media are also calling for an indefinite protest - excluding those ERT stations airing rogue broadcasts maintained by workers who have refused to leave their posts.
"This is a very important struggle that impacts on everybody, because the draft bill is not only about ERT, it's about thousands of other workers too because it's a green light for thousands of lay-offs in public organisations," Georgios Milionis of the communist-backed labour group, the All-Workers Militant Front, told Associated Press.
But there is little sign of private businesses joining the strike.
'No sympathy'
City streets have been as full as usual with commuters and car traffic.
Supermarkets have been open for business and cafes serving customers as usual.
"The lowest ERT employee is making in a day what I'm making in a week, so why should I strike for them?" vegetable-seller Yannis Papailias told Reuters news agency in Athens.
"Hundreds of thousands of people have lost their jobs. Who protested for them?" asked waitress Maria Skylakou.
Unions representing about 2.5 million workers have repeatedly gone on strike in Greece since Europe's debt crisis erupted in late 2009, although action has been less frequent and more muted lately than last year when marches frequently turned violent.
Corruption and mismanagement are widely known to exist within ERT, a public company symptomatic of Greece's past mistakes, the BBC's Mark Lowen in Athens reports.
But employees maintain successive governments were responsible as they were in charge, our correspondent adds.
Anger
The government says ERT was a huge drain on public resources, and will reopen at a later date under a new format and with considerably fewer staff.
All 2,655 employees will be compensated and allowed to apply for jobs at the revamped organisation.
The announcement came after months of strikes by ERT employees in opposition to plans to restructure the broadcaster.
Athens has pledged to cut thousands of public-sector jobs as part of agreements under which it receives billions of euros in rescue loans from the European Union and International Monetary Fund.
ERT, which began broadcasting in 1938, is funded by a direct payment of 4.30 euros (£3.80; $6) added monthly to electricity bills.
It ran three domestic TV channels, four national radio stations, as well regional radio stations and an external service, Voice of Greece.
Are you affected by the strike? Do you agree with Prime Minister Antonis Samaras? Send your comments using the form below.



Is Istanbul safe for tourists?
(CNN) -- Weather, airfare and upcoming local events are criteria that typically factor into travel decisions.
This week, however, far greater concerns are on the minds of potential visitors to Istanbul.
Ongoing local protests, government retaliation and related unrest in the city have many wondering if they should pull the plug on upcoming trips or make any new plans at all.
The British government has warned its citizens to avoid demonstrations in Istanbul and Ankara, and the US state department urges travelers to be "alert to the potential for violence".
What began as a small, peaceful protest against a planned shopping mall in the city's Gezi Park has quickly turned into what some protesters now call a "war zone," with police using brute force to quell demonstrations.
A worldwide audience has watched as police fired water cannons and tear gas at defiant protesters in Taksim Square.
Tourism crucial to Istanbul
According to the 2012 MasterCard Global Destinations Cities Index, Istanbul is among the fastest growing tourism markets in the world, receiving 11.6 million international visitors and earning $10.6 billion in travel revenue in 2012.
The Turkish Statistics Institute reports the country's total tourism revenue for 2012 was $29.4 billion. According to an April report by TradeArabia, Turkey expects to receive 33 million international visitors in 2013.
Hünkar Akipek, a young professional who has taken part in the protests, tells CNN that protestors are aware of the possibility that recent events will harm Istanbul's reputation abroad.
"Sure we are worried," says Akipek. 
"I got so many emails, calls from my Turkish and non-Turkish friends abroad.
"I am careful to answer their question of 'What is going on there?' to not make any harm to Istanbul's reputation. This is where we live and where we want to go on living and raise our children. We do not want to damage our home."
"Istanbul, a city that has always been known as Turkey's cultural heart, is turning into a war zone," says Royce Yakuppur, a local who has been to Gezi Park several times in recent days. 
"Although the feeling of solidarity (among locals) should be applauded as a virtue, it is not enough to overcome the fears of tourists."
Unsurprisingly, local travel agencies report that some travelers have recently canceled trips to Istanbul or are having second thoughts about coming in the next few weeks. 
Yet "many" are still going ahead with their plans.
No statistics on cancellations are available.
Traveler's tales from a week of unrest
By and large, for visitors and locals alike, Istanbul feels safe.
Travelers across the city tell CNN that while they've had to modify some plans, they've felt neither threatened nor endangered.
Colombian tourist Juanita Pardo arrived in Istanbul on June 10. She says she didn't change her travel plans after learning of the protests, despite being warned by family members to avoid the area around Taksim Square.
"There was a lot of traffic, a lot of police, and (some) roads were closed so we chose to walk and couldn't go everywhere we wanted to," she says of touring the city in the midst of the protests. 
"We had to cancel some plans, like having dinner at Mikla, which is located in Taksim, where we didn't want to go.
"We couldn't see Istiklal Street, which we had heard a lot about."
Kevin Patnode, a 23-year-old New Yorker who has been spent the past four summers in Istanbul as a coordinator for an English language program, arrived in Istanbul on June 4.
"The protests made me want to come even more," Patnode tells CNN.
"Besides Taksim Square, the surrounding areas are untouched by the current situation," he says. 
"I even visited Gezi Park three times and never felt unsafe. Even though I speak no Turkish, I never felt out of place or that I was unsafe. The only change that has occurred has been my social life. Istanbul is a party city and Turks know how to have a good time. But after the protests, a lot of people find it inappropriate to be out and going to the bars and clubs surrounding Taksim. It is certainly not frowned upon for foreigners to go out and enjoy themselves, and I've been encouraged to go out and continue to enjoy Istanbul -- however I cannot expect my Turkish friends to come along and join me."
Most of Istanbul's top attractions, such as the Blue Mosque, Hagia Sophia and Topkapı Palace, are located in Sultanahmet, far from Taksim Square.
Referred to as the "new Berlin" by some, Istanbul boasts a growing art scene, with contemporary galleries and museums, such as Salt Galata, Arter and the Istanbul Museum of Modern Art leading the field.
Contemporary Turkish cuisine also draws tourists to Istanbul.
The city's historic peninsula, funky cafes and bohemian neighborhoods feel as exciting -- and welcoming -- as always.
"Istanbul is as appealing as ever," insists one local. 
"Much like a beautiful woman, but with smudged mascara."


Netanyahu opens Holocaust display at Auschwitz
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has opened a Holocaust exhibition at the Auschwitz Nazi death camp site in southern Poland.
The display in Block 27 places the former camp in the broader context of the Nazis' systematic attempt to wipe out Europe's Jewish population.
It is being overseen by Israel's Yad Vashem Holocaust institute.
Earlier in Warsaw, Mr Netanyahu accused Iran, one of Israel's strongest foes, of planning a new Holocaust.
On Thursday, he was taken around the exhibition at the former camp before making a speech at the opening ceremony, Yad Vashem reported on its Twitter account.
The original Jewish exhibition at Auschwitz dated back to the 1960s and had fallen into neglect, prompting the Israeli government to decide recently on a revamp.
An estimated 1.1 million Jews, together with some 200,000 people of other ethnicities and backgrounds, died in Auschwitz and the adjacent Birkenau camp, in gas chambers or from starvation, disease and forced labour.
The new display features:
    a 360-degree montage of the pre-war Jewish life
    recreated drawings of some of the 1.5 million Jewish children murdered in the Holocaust
    recorded survivor testimonies
    massive volumes of books listing the names of some 4.2 million Jewish victims that Yad Vashem painstakingly managed to recover
Iranian 'threat'
Mr Netanyahu used a visit to the Polish capital on Wednesday to warn that Iran was now a major threat to the Jews.
Iranians are going to the polls on Friday to elect a new president, with the hard-line incumbent, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, not eligible for a third term.
Mr Netanyahu said the Iranian election on Friday would "change nothing" in the Islamic republic's alleged quest for nuclear weapons.
"This is a regime that is building nuclear weapons with the expressed purpose to annihilate Israel's six million Jews," he said. 
"We will not allow this to happen. We will never allow another Holocaust."
Tehran denies seeking to acquire nuclear weapons.
Iran is viewed as a threat in Israel because of its aggressive rhetoric, its support for militant groups in the region, its arsenal of long-range missiles and its nuclear work.
However, critics of the Israeli prime minister have accused him of citing the Holocaust too frequently in the context of Iran.
Aluf Benn, editor of liberal Israeli newspaper Haaretz, wrote in an editorial last week: "Shoah [Holocaust] warnings have taken over the political and military discourse."


Pregnant Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge, names cruise ship
(CNN) -- Sporting a growing "baby bump," Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge, named a cruise ship on England's south coast Thursday, in what is expected to be her last solo public engagement before her child is due next month.
Wearing a stylish black and white animal print coat, she cut a cord to send the traditional bottle of champagne smashing against the hull of the Royal Princess.
The ceremony in the city of Southampton also included a blessing by the Bishop of Winchester, the Right Rev. Tim Dakin, a performance by British pop singer Natasha Bedingfield and music from military bands.
Catherine was then to be given a brief tour of the cruise liner, as its "godmother."
The ship, owned by Princess Cruises and with room for 3,600 passengers, will embark on its maiden voyage Sunday.
The Royal Princess will then sail Mediterranean cruises through the summer and Eastern Caribbean cruises in the fall. 
According to Princess Cruises, the huge ship houses the largest pastry store to be found at sea.
There was a gala dinner Wednesday night for guests at the naming ceremony, who included representatives of the charities for which Catherine serves as patron.
The Royal Princess was built for Princess Cruises, a part of Carnival Corp., at the Fincantieri shipyard in Monfalcone, Italy.
Alan Buckelew, the line's president and CEO, paid tribute to its British heritage in a speech ahead of the champagne smash, with a reference to its origins in the former London-registered Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co., better known as P&O.
Prince William's late mother, Diana, Princess of Wales, was "godmother" to the original Royal Princess liner, which launched from Southampton in 1984.
She and Catherine pronounced the same words as they played their role in the official naming ceremony, saying: "I name this ship Royal Princess. May God bless her and all who sail in her."
Other "godmothers" for the cruise line's ships include the late British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and actresses Sophia Loren and Audrey Hepburn.
Heir to the throne
It's not known if Catherine and Prince William are expecting a boy or a girl, but a change in royal succession laws means that their first child will be the heir to the British throne regardless of gender.
The couple married in London's Westminster Abbey in April 2011. 
William is second in line to the throne after his father, Prince Charles.
Queen Elizabeth II, William's grandmother, last week celebrated 60 years since her coronation.
On Monday, she paid a birthday visit to her husband, Prince Philip, in the hospital where he's convalescing after undergoing abdominal surgery last Friday.
The Duke of Edinburgh, age 92, could stay in the hospital for another week, according to a palace statement.


Stephen Hester to step down as RBS chief executive
(Financial Times) -- Stephen Hester is to step down as chief executive of Royal Bank of Scotland at the end of the year as the UK government pushes for another overhaul of the part-nationalised group and prepares the ground to start selling its 82 per cent stake in the lender.
Aides to George Osborne, the chancellor, said he and the bank's board had been keen to appoint a new CEO who could lead a five-year transition that would see RBS reprivatised and re-established as a British commerical bank.
"Having brought RBS back from the brink, now is the time to move on from the rescue phase," Mr Osborne said.
The board said on Wednesday that it would launch an immediate search for a successor to Mr Hester, looking both internally and externally.
Mr Hester was parachuted into RBS in late 2008 to replace the disgraced Fred Goodwin. 
The bank had to be bailed out with £45bn of government money following Mr Goodwin's disastrous takeover of Dutch bank ABN Amro, just as the global financial crisis was taking hold.
He has overseen a dramatic shrinkage and clean-up of RBS, but had resisted pressure to pull back from interntional and investment banking as dramatically as the government would have liked.
RBS is set to announce further cut-backs in its investment bank on Thursday, with up to 2,000 of its 11,300 investment bankers set to go as the group implements an earlier plan to shrink the unit's balance sheet by a further 20 per cent.
There may also be an attempt to further cleanse RBS of more of its non-performing businesses, with a particular focus on Irish subsidiary Ulster Bank, according to people close to the situation.
Mr Osborne has previously outlined many practical reasons for not removing more of RBS's toxic assets from the bank, but the chancellor is now considering the option and may give details in his Mansion House speech next week.
He said he was awaiting a report by Andrew Tyrie's parliamentary banking standards committee, which will identify a "good bank/bad bank" split as a possible option for swiftly restoring RBS to health.
All of that could hold up the swift reprivatisation that RBS has been hoping for. 
In a change of tone from the Treasury, Mr Osborne's aides now say the chancellor is "not desperately trying to sell shares before the election".
The chancellor recognises that any RBS sale far below the 503p paid by the Labour government in 2008-9 would be politically unpalatable, in spite of David Cameron's wish to return to the bank to the private sector "as fast as possible".
The market response to Mr Hester's removal was mixed. 
"His departure will be a loss," analysts at Citigroup wrote in a note to clients. 
However, one top 20 investor in RBS said: "We have a lot of regard for Hester. 
But maybe now is the time to appoint a new person ... to be there at the beginning of the privatisation."
The choice of successor will be crucial for investors. 
Two people familiar with the situation said Sir Philip Hampton, RBS chairman, had taken informal soundings both within the bank and externally in the past few weeks.
Richard Meddings, currently finance director of emerging markets-focused bank Standard Chartered, is among those to have been indirectly approached, the people said.
RBS's most likely internal candidates for the role would be risk chief Nathan Bostock, who is poised to become finance director, Rory Cullinan, who has headed the process of winding down the bank's non-core portfolio, or retail boss Ross McEwan.
Mr Hester will receive a severance payment in December of £1.6m, equivalent to 12 months' pay and benefits, but no annual bonus. 
He will remain entitled to ongoing long-term incentive awards, equivalent to about 2m shares.
However, these will be subject to performance conditions, which will cut the realisable maximum to between 45 per cent and 65 per cent of the total -- equivalent to £3m-£4m at today's share prices.
Mr Osborne praised Mr Hester's "important contribution" and Sir Philip acknowledged his "absolutely immense achievements".
But it is clear they eased the chief executive from his job. 
Mr Hester himself had been keen to stay on for at least another two years to see RBS return to sustainable profitability and to shepherd through the start of the bank's reprivatisation. 
He recently told the Financial Times: "I hate not winning, I hate it."
Mr Hester said in a video interview on the RBS website: "I can completely understand that a fresh face with the ability to commit many years into the future may be a good thing for privatisation. Of course I'd like to have stayed because I feel that I've been in the trenches with all my people helping RBS to recover. Privatisation would have been fitting end to those endeavours."
But he added: "Its been a very bruising and difficult job, so I certainly don't have to be prised away reluctantly."
Mr Osborne said in a statement: "When Stephen Hester took on the job at RBS in 2008 it was a bust bank with a broken culture and posed a huge risk to financial stability.
RBS today is safer, stronger and better able to support its customers. 
I want to commend Stephen Hester for everything he has done to make this turnaround possible. 
The size and complexity of the bank has been significantly reduced, with a far greater focus on serving its UK customers.
Some bankers have long believed the end of 2013 would be a natural time for Mr Hester to step down, with RBS's turnround programme -- including the wind-down of a £250bn portfolio of "non-core", largely non-performing, loans -- set to be all but complete by December.
The government had been keen to initiate the process of selling its 82 per cent shareholding in RBS, and its 39 per cent stake in Lloyds Banking Group, before the 2015 general election.
Bank insiders say Mr Hester has had a difficult relationship with the government and, in recent months particularly, with Sir Philip.
Sir Philip said in a video interview released by RBS: "This has been one of the most demanding business jobs in the world."
"The public environment for banks and bankers has been very difficult. For Stephen, its been even more challenging."
There have been annual rows over bonuses, both for himself and for RBS's well-paid investment bankers. 
Mr Hester, a former Credit Suisse executive, has fought hard to keep intact RBS's investment banking operation and its US retail banking presence.
But late last year -- after a direct intervention by Mr Osborne, and under pressure from regulators over capital -- Mr Hester relented on both issues. 
The investment bank is now being shrunk by a third and Citizens, its US consumer arm, is preparing for flotation.
Replacing Mr Hester will be a challenge. 
Mr Meddings is among the few British executives generally considered a feasible candidate, although bankers point out that even his nomination could be politically problematic due to his involvement in a row between StanChart and US regulators last year over sanctions breaches -- an affair that ended up costing the group hundreds of millions of dollars in fines.
Brooks Newmark, a MP on the Treasury select committee and former senior partner of private equity outfit Apollo Management, said that the bank and the government were right to ask Mr Hester to leave if he could not commit to another lengthy term at the helm of the bank.
"If you are planning to do a share offering, any uncertainty with key management would give hindrance to potential shareholders," he said.
"He [Mr Hester] has completed a complicated restructuring and effectively created a new RBS going forward and it probably makes sense now to have a new chief executive in."
"If they do the transition now, Osborne has some time for a capital raising or tax payer pay out before the 2015 election."


Protests in Turkey bring a reckoning to Prime Minister Erdogan
Recep Tayyip Erdogan's Islam-democracy blend may be too restrictive for the secularists, activists and even working-class mothers protesting in Taksim Square.
ISTANBUL, Turkey — With swagger and grand designs, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan rose to power more than a decade ago, heralding a new Islamist-based democracy he envisioned as a model for a Muslim world caught in the grip of autocrats, kings and despots.
But more than two weeks of protest against Erdogan's increasingly authoritarian rule have brought a reckoning to a leader who, despite his political astuteness, has miscalculated the fervor from a large part of an electorate opposed to the creeping religious conservatism of his Justice and Development Party, or AKP.
Erdogan is still very much in control, and few would venture that the crisis will bring him down, but the protests have hurt him politically and exposed misgivings within his party. 
Tear gas and water cannons have damaged Turkey's international image, upsetting the stock market and giving investors pause at a time when the once hyper-speed economy has slowed to about 3% annual growth.
The unrest also suggests that his blend of Islam and democracy is too restrictive for secularists, artists, activists and even working-class mothers who have turned out in Istanbul's central Taksim Square. 
Like Egypt's Tahrir Square two years ago, it has been transformed into an iconic, scorched patch of rebellion.
"Erdogan's vulnerability now is the secular middle classes that have risen against AKP governance. And that genie will not go back into the bottle," said Soner Cagaptay, director of the Turkish Research Program at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. 
"This is a new dynamic in Turkish politics and this will challenge him on his urban renewal and foreign policy programs. So far, he has had an easy ride."
But the crisis is "not defining in the sense that Erdogan and the AKP will lose elections or that there will be a fundamental shift in the balance of power," said Shadi Hamid, director of research at the Brookings Doha Center. 
"There is no obvious take away from these protests of the sort we saw in Egypt and Tunisia."
He said, however, that demonstrations "put a real wrench in Erdogan's plans in revising the constitution and perhaps plans to run for the presidency."
But Erdogan has a sizable base and can point to leading Turkey through 10 years of economic growth and political stability even as his government, at times quietly, persecuted journalists, human rights activists and others. 
Yet many question his support of rebels seeking to overthrow the government in neighboring Syria and his social policies that include a push to restrict alcohol sales.
Erdogan on Wednesday met with some demonstrators to try to ease the tension. 
But the movement's key activists were not invited. 
Turkish media reported that more than 1,000 lawyers rallied outside a courthouse to criticize the arrest of about 50 of their colleagues a day earlier. 
By nightfall, protesters were gathering in Gezi Park, which adjoins the Taksim, as police forces mobilized after Erdogan promised protests would end within 24 hours.
Doctors said at least 2,500 people were injured — including 130 shot by plastic bullets — Tuesday when police stormed the square and forced out protesters amid exchanges of tear gas and Molotov cocktails. 
The demonstrations, which began last month over Erdogan's plans to develop Gezi Park, have erupted into one of the most serious crises of his career.
"I am hopeful that we will surmount this through democratic maturity," President Abdullah Gul told reporters. 
"If they have objections, we need to hear them, enter into a dialogue. It is our duty to lend them an ear."
Turkish news reports said Wednesday night that an AKP official said the government might consider holding a referendum on development in the park. 
Such a move would mark Erdogan's most significant gesture to defuse the crisis.
The prime minister has offered to scrap a proposed shopping center in the park but he plans to build a replica of an Ottoman-era barracks and possibly a mosque and opera house. 
Many Turks also have been infuriated by Erdogan's naming of a new bridge over the Bosporus in Istanbul after an Ottoman sultan accused by the nation's Alevi minority of massacring many of its sect.
But Erdogan appears aloof to the wider passions of those against him, many of them young and without political allegiances. 
Erdogan, who sold sesame buns as a boy on Istanbul's tough streets and as a politician outflanked Turkey's powerful military, has called the protesters "bums" and unleashed police violence against them.
"What is most worrying for me though is the way both Erdogan, his government and his supporters have interpreted the protests: A conspiracy orchestrated by 'dark powers that want to halt Turkey's progress,'" Mustafa Akyol, a columnist, wrote in Hurriyet Daily News. 
"In the pro-Erdogan media, this conspiratorial interpretation of the events has been taken to new, and more absurd, levels."
Similar conspiracy theories were voiced by falling autocrats during the Arab uprisings two years ago. 
Erdogan vilified those leaders for suppressing civil freedoms but he has acted like them in countering his own opposition. 
His style and his determination to stay in power have drawn comparisons to Russian President Vladimir Putin, who over the years has switched job titles but has remained his country's ultimate authority.
"Erdogan has ambitions of continuing his domination of Turkish politics by 'pulling a Putin' and engineering a transition to a presidential system that he would head," said Howard Eissenstat, an expert on Turkey in the department of history at St. Lawrence University in Canton, N.Y.
"Resistance within the party to this is likely to be much higher after his bumbling performance this past two weeks," he said. 
"In particular, the crackdown seems to be exacerbating the fracture between him and the wing of the party associated" with the Islamist movement led by Fethullah Gulen, a prominent Muslim intellectual who lives in Pennsylvania and advocates religious tolerance.
Erdogan's moderate and conservative Islamist supporters, especially those in the provinces, do not want his religious agenda and echoes of Ottoman grandeur to be jeopardized by an uproar from liberal sectors.
"He might lose the battle but win the war," said Cagaptay. 
"Half of Turks still support the AKP, and he can consolidate this base to be united against liberals.... He can bring the AKP camps together."
But — as has been apparent in Taksim Square over the last two weeks — Turkey is in the midst of a collision of ideals that so far Erdogan has been unable to calm.
"I feel like I am in a horror movie," said Havva Dogan, who picked up cigarette butts and rubbish in Gezi Park early Wednesday afternoon, cheap rubber gloves on her hands, a gas mask hanging from her neck. 
"Erdogan is a dictator. He is not only showing his power, but he's sending us a message: You have no rights."


Turkish protesters defy warning, battle police in Taksim Square
Angered by what they see as Prime Minister Erdogan's heavy hand, ousted crowds spill into the streets, adding supporters as they fight to return to the square.
ISTANBUL, Turkey — Protesters defying a blunt warning from Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan engaged in running battles Tuesday with police who unleashed clouds of tear gas and blasts of water cannons in an effort to end nearly two weeks of protest.
After daylong street battles, protesters who were chased away in the early morning swarmed back into Istanbul's central Taksim Square, which has become a focus for grievances in a country long regarded as a model of democracy and economic growth in the Muslim world.
They were met with more tear gas and water cannons, a reflection of a sharp increase in confrontations after several days of relative calm. 
By late Tuesday neither side appeared to be backing down.
Protesters angered by what they regard as Erdogan's heavy hand spilled into surrounding streets and neighborhoods, adding supporters as they fought to get back to the square. 
Erdogan, who harshly criticized former Egyptian strongman Hosni Mubarak for his crackdown on "Arab Spring" protesters in 2011, appeared intent on making good on a warning that his patience was at an end.
"Erdogan is a foolish man," said protester Osman Soybir, a civil engineer wearing swimming goggles to protect himself from the tear gas wafting from the square.
"This is not just a disappointment, it's tragic. He has too much power and he showed us today he will use it," Soybir added before another volley of tear gas sent him sprinting down the street.
Istanbul's governor, Huseyin Mutlu, said the police operation would continue until the area was cleared of protesters.
"From this moment on, the unshakable power of our state and our nation will be shown on marginal groups by our police forces," Mutlu said at a news conference.
The unrest began as a peaceful sit-in to protest plans to destroy the adjoining Gezi Park to make way for redevelopment, but it quickly swelled into nationwide demonstrations when police attempted to clear the park of demonstrators. 
Violence has also flared in other cities, notably in Izmir and the capital, Ankara. 
At least three people have died, including a police officer, and thousands have been injured, according to a doctors union.
The protesters are made up mostly of middle-class youths largely unaffiliated with any political party. 
Instead, they represent a fiercely nationalistic and secular current and feel threatened by what they see as Erdogan's authoritarianism and the ruling party's increasing focus on Islamic strictures.
Some opposition leaders, however, have joined in condemning the police crackdown.
The government's response, instead of defusing the situation, is "creating the opposite effect," Faruk Logoglu, deputy chairman of the main opposition Republican People's Party, said in a telephone interview Tuesday night. 
"On one hand the government says … we respect your democratic rights — then they attack with full force."
Erdogan, who has won three consecutive elections, has dismissed the protesters as hooligans and extremists and rejected comparisons to the Arab Spring uprisings.
Turkey's thriving multiparty democracy and vibrant economy bear little resemblance to the autocracies that ruled Tunisia, Libya, Egypt and Yemen or the current government in Syria. 
Although Erdogan may have underestimated the resolve of the protesters, he retains considerable support.
"To those who … are at Taksim and elsewhere taking part in the demonstrations with sincere feelings, I call on you to leave those places and to end these incidents, and I send you my love," Erdogan said in a televised address to members of parliament from his Justice and Development Party in Ankara.
"But for those who want to continue with the incidents I say: 'It's over.' As of now we have no tolerance for them," Erdogan was quoted as saying by the Associated Press. 
"Not only will we end the actions, we will be at the necks of the provocateurs and terrorists, and no one will get away with it."
Tuesday's violence began with a dawn raid at the square, which has seen demonstrators numbering in the tens of thousands in recent days, although just a few hundred were camped out overnight. 
Hundreds of police officers backed by armored vehicles overran improvised barricades and moved into the area, tearing down posters and banners that festooned the square.
A small group of protesters — scarves wrapped around their heads — hurled Molotov cocktails and aimed fireworks at police positioned under a revered statue in the center of Taksim Square. 
Others set a vehicle ablaze, sending plumes of smoke into the sky.
Control of the square appeared to change hands several times during the day. 
Just before the police, who had pulled back in the early evening, launched dozens of tear-gas shells about 8:30 p.m., there was a festive air among the swelling crowds of demonstrators returning to the embattled area. 
They danced, waved banners and chanted "Erdogan resign."
The tear gas sent a wave of panic through the crowd. 
Protesters ran through side streets and into cafes. 
Inside one restaurant on Istiklal Street, activists handed out lemons to combat the effects of the gas, and diners offered their drinks to the dozens crammed inside.
"We are seeing lots of injuries, mostly from head trauma, a lot of people gagging from tear gas," said a volunteer at a makeshift field hospital that was aiding protesters near Gezi Park. 
She asked to be identified only as Gizem P.
Officials initially said Tuesday morning's raid was to remove posters from the statue in Taksim Square and the nearby Ataturk Cultural Center and would not affect demonstrators assembled in Gezi Park. 
However, Interior Minister Muammer Guler later said the "intervention took place to normalize life" at the square, state media reported. 
At one point, police began marching toward the park but retreated after a brief confrontation with protesters, witnesses said.
"It was provocation," said one protester, who gave her name as Deniz A., standing in Gezi Park as tear gas hung in the air. 
"They want clashes with us, then they can portray us as the aggressors."
Erdogan defended the police operation, according to local news reports. 
"What were we supposed to do? Kneel in front of these people and ask them to remove the banners? How would those illegal rags be removed from public buildings?"
Tuesday's raid came despite reports that negotiations between the ruling Justice and Development Party and the Gezi Park movement were set to commence. 
Erdogan was expected to meet with representatives of the protesters Wednesday, though it was unclear after the nighttime clashes if the session would still be held.


Turkey's leader agrees to halt park project
After meeting with protesters, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan says he'll freeze a development project in popular Gezi Park in Istanbul, let a referendum decide.
ISTANBUL, Turkey — Besieged Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan agreed Friday to freeze construction in a popular Istanbul park after an emergency meeting with antigovernment protesters in Ankara, easing fear of further violence after two weeks of widespread chaos and bloodshed.
The meeting, which lasted more than three hours, appeared to be a last-minute effort by the prime minister to avert a police crackdown to remove thousands of demonstrators from Gezi Park who opposed the development plan. 
The meeting included members of the Taksim Solidarity Platform, a leading dissident group that was not invited to a similar meeting the previous day.
Speaking after Friday's meeting, government spokesman Huseyin Celik said a court order against the proposed development in the park would remain in place.
"Nothing will be done until the end of the judicial process," Celik said. 
Then "there will be a referendum among the people of Istanbul ... to see what the people of Istanbul want."
Celik said results of that poll would "be applied directly."
Hours earlier, Erdogan said at a gathering of his Justice and Development Party in Ankara, the capital, that the era of showdown on the streets was over in Turkey.
"We cannot allow lawbreakers to hang around freely in this square. We will clean the square," Erdogan reportedly said Thursday. 
"The era of extorting the nation's will on streets is over. The era of suppressing, terrifying and scaring the people is over."
Erdogan had given protesters one day to end their 2-week-old occupation of the park in central Istanbul, an ultimatum that rights groups said added fuel to a crisis that had given rise to "appalling levels of violence."
The protesters have put Istanbul in the international spotlight after their demonstration against the park development grew into a rally against Erdogan's increasingly authoritarian rule.
The prime minister's political party had suggested that he was open to the possibility of holding a referendum on the park's future. 
It was his biggest concession yet, but it came as hundreds of police officers, brought into the area aboard dozens of buses, gathered at dusk Thursday around Taksim Square and the adjacent park, causing concern that another crackdown was imminent.
Police stormed the square Tuesday, entering Gezi Park three times.
On Thursday, bulldozers cleared protesters' barricades on side streets adjacent to the park. 
Demonstrators looked on, while teams of workers spray-painted over the antigovernment political graffiti covering walls. 
A police helicopter circled the area through much of Thursday afternoon.
"Today or tomorrow they will come," said Gusel, a recent graduate of an Istanbul university who sat in the park. 
"I have seen how the police act. We are all scared."
Gusel, who asked that his last name not be used for fear of reprisal, worried that tear gas canisters would come through the sycamore trees stretching skyward above him and that police would use plastic bullets and stun grenades to control the crowd. 
He worried about how to get out of the park, now holding several thousand people, if tear gas blanketed the area.
Another protester, Tugce, who also asked that her full name not be used, pulled a slingshot from her bag and said that she and her friends — radical leftists — had Molotov cocktails ready. 
She said it was the police who should be afraid.
"I'm not afraid of the police, even though they have all kinds of weapons," she said. 
"This is a fascist government which kills protesters. We will fight for our rights."
The government has emphasized the role of radicals in the demonstrations and suggested that foreign hands are seeking to create instability in the country. 
Erdogan, who has won three consecutive elections and retains considerable support, has dismissed many of the protesters as hooligans and militants.
But the Gezi Park movement is largely driven by a secular, nationalist strand of nonviolent youth, previously alienated from Turkish political life.
"Erdogan's approach has inflated the radical groups' view of themselves while radicalizing the mainstream groups," said Hugh Pope, head of the International Crisis Group's Turkish wing. 
"The way to start dealing with the crisis is to engage with the mainstream opposition."
Erdogan, who rose through the Islamic underground to become the most powerful man in Turkey, had appeared determined to stay the course, insisting on development in the area despite the court ruling two weeks ago that construction could not proceed.
Erdogan bristled Thursday after the European Parliament issued a nonbinding resolution expressing concern at the "disproportionate and excessive use of force" by police to quell the protest, which has resulted in the deaths of four people, including a policeman, and the injury of about 5,000.
"I do not recognize any decision that the Parliament of the European Union makes on Turkey," he said during the meeting in Ankara. 
"How come the members of its Parliament took a decision that concerns my country? How could they dare?"
The EU action focused attention on the tense, years-long negotiations regarding Turkey, a NATO member, entering the European Union. 
Germany and other countries have expressed doubt about Erdogan's commitment to civil rights, and the crackdown on protesters prompted new concern.
In an indication of how the protests are affecting Turkey's image and its economy, Erdogan accused the international media of exaggerated coverage.
"It is as if the whole of Turkey is on fire, as if the whole of Turkey is collapsing," he said, suggesting that the media were "deceptive and unethical."
At the park, many demonstrators remained tense, waiting for what would come next.
Ezgi Kardaslar taped a flag to a tent. 
She was part of a youth group camped in the park. 
Nearby, two men planted a bed of flowers.
"The police will come with their gas and noise bombs," she said. 
"I'm not afraid. I trust the people here to protect me."


Airbus A350 makes maiden test flight
The Airbus A350 takes off on its maiden flight
The newest aircraft from European planemaker Airbus has taken off on its maiden test flight.
The Airbus A350 is designed to be more fuel-efficient, and a direct competitor to US rival Boeing's 787 Dreamliner.
It is seen as vital to the future of Airbus, which competes with Boeing to supply the majority of the world's airlines with new planes.
It took off from Blagnac airstrip in the French city of Toulouse, where the A350 is assembled, on Friday morning.
The plane will take a short trip to carry out tests, and then land back at Toulouse again.
Boeing's Dreamliner has proved popular since its first flight in 2009, despite recently being grounded by regulators over safety fears relating to its batteries.
Major milestone
Airlines are being squeezed by high fuel costs and falling passenger numbers, and are looking for more fuel-efficient aircraft.
Airbus claims the A350, powered by Rolls-Royce Trent XWB engines, will use about 25% less fuel than previous generation wide-bodied aircraft.
Like the Dreamliner, the A350 is made largely of advanced materials, particularly carbon composites, in order to save weight.
Airbus has already taken more than 600 orders for the new plane, whereas there have been 890 Dreamliner orders so far.
The company hopes to start delivering the first A350s to customers by the end of 2014.
Analysts say a successful test flight would be a major milestone for Airbus in the A350 project, with major aircraft manufacturing projects frequently beset by delays.
"All recent programmes before it, both by Airbus, Boeing and others, have had reasonably horrendous technical problems and delays," said Nick Cunningham, an aviation analyst at the London-based Agency Partners, speaking to French agency AFP.
"So every time you hit a milestone (such as a test flight), it's good news because it means that you've missed an opportunity to have another big delay."
The plane's wings were designed at an Airbus facility in Filton near Bristol, and are manufactured at Broughton in Wales.


Czech PM aide held in raids against organised crime 
Police in the Czech Republic have raided government offices across the country as part of a crackdown on organised crime.
Several people have been arrested, including the most senior aide to Prime Minister Petr Necas.
Some 400 police officers began raiding businesses, government departments and the prime minister's office in the early hours of Thursday morning.
Mr Necas said he had done nothing "dishonest" and would not resign.
"I am personally convinced that I did not do anything dishonest and that my colleagues have not done anything dishonest either," he added.
He said that he expected police and prosecutors to explain why such a large operation was necessary.
Mr Necas is due to appear before parliament on Friday morning. 
The main opposition Social Democrat party has called on him to resign.
President Milos Zeman has scheduled a meeting on Friday with the prime minister, the chief of police and the leader of the opposition to discuss the crisis, Radio Prague reports.
The raids on officials, MPs and businessmen are unprecedented in their scale and seriousness, the BBC's Prague correspondent Rob Cameron reports.
Two former MPs from Mr Necas's Civic Democratic Party are reported to be among those arrested.
Police 'visit'
The head of Mr Necas's office, Jana Nagyova, was among those detained. 
She is described as his closest adviser.
Mr Necas was also "visited" by police and two state attorneys, Interior Minister Jan Kubice said, but gave no further details.
Commentators agree that this could be the death blow for an already shaky government, our correspondent says.
The raids appear to be connected to a long-running police investigation into links between corrupt businessmen and the state administration, he adds.
In March, the country was gripped by the case of a lobbyist, Roman Janousek, who was alleged to have had huge influence over politicians and officials in Prague.
Mr Janousek was arrested on suspicion of deliberately running over a woman with his car while drunk, which could incur a jail term of up to 10 years.


China May Buy European Debt: Is This Good Or Bad ?
In this edition of U-talk – “Do you think that the European Union will look to China as a future creditor?” asks Nicola (London).
The response to this question is provided by Gregory Vanel, a Senior Economist and Political Analyst.
What you’re asking is whether or not European countries would be interested in China financing thei public debts. 
This is a very good question for at least 3 reasons.
First, in the private sector, we see that for the last 5 years, direct Chinese investment in Europe has been increasing strongly. 
For instance, Chinese investors have bought part of the Port of Piraeus [Athens], and more recently Chinese companies have invested in Club Méd and Eutelsat.
Secondly, Chinese investment would allow some European countries to lower their long term interest rates.
Thirdly, China has enough money to buy a good portion of European countries’ debt. 
China enjoys huge exchange reserves worth 3,300 billion dollars, that is more or less Germany’s GDP.
So, on a technical basis, Chinese investments could indeed help European countries.
Having said that, in the long term, European countries may not be interested in having China buy their debts.
Firstly because China would first and foremost buy debt from the highest rated countries, in particular Germany, France and the UK and China would not necessarily help countries like Greece or Portugal.
But, more importantly, it would imply a very damaging loss of sovereignty [for European countries] because there are at least 3 problems in the relationship between Europe and China:
The first one is about the exchange rate of the yuan which is “undervalued” for several European countries.
The second point is about China’s growing influence in Africa. 
On this particular issue, France’s intervention in Mali is clearly meant to stop the growing influence of China.
And the third problem is linked to protectionism, subsidies and what is called dumping by China which harms European companies for instance in the photovoltaic [solar panel] sector”.


Dozens of Turkish protesters released, counter rally in the works
Istanbul (CNN) -- After two weeks of raucous anti-government street protests, calm settled over Istanbul for a second day Friday as the city prepared for pro-government counter demonstrations.
By contrast, police in Ankara launched tear gas at rowdy demonstrators who tried to set up barricades to cut off traffic.
The government seemed to relax its stance on Gezi Park, announcing it will not take action on construction plans there until a court considers the objections of protesters camped out in the park.
Police released 46 demonstrators detained in the protests, CNN sister network CNN Turk reported.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan started off Thursday by quipping that the park reeked of urine and needed to be cleared of "vagabonds" and "thugs" for sanitary reasons.
But by the end of the day, he sat with leaders of Taksim Solidarity, a coalition of protesters that comprises dentists, pharmacists, engineers and other educated secularists.
Erdogan agreed to meet with them after a group of prominent artists insisted they be included in the gathering with the prime minister, according to Taksim Solidarity.
Many activists had backed out of a previous meeting with Erdogan out of anger over the tear gas against demonstrators by police this week.
Get out
The prime minister called on protesters camped out in the park to pack up and leave. 
"We are running out of patience," he told members of his party in the capital, Ankara, on Thursday.
"I am making this warning for one last time."
Gezi Park reeks, and police need to clear it out, Erdogan said.
"It stinks of pee," he said. 
" In fact, some of them even poo in there."
He lashed out at rowdy demonstrators and told peaceful protesters they need not complain about police actions because they had exposed themselves to tear gas fire by associating with the wrong people and illegal groups.
"Where dry wood is burning, fresh wood will also burn unnecessarily," Erdogan said. 
He vowed to continue routing out rowdies and ordered peaceful protesters out of the park, asking them to leave police alone with "illegal groups."
What began in late May as a demonstration focused on the environment -- opposition to a plan to build a mall in Gezi Park -- has evolved into a wider protest against Erdogan that's spread around the country.
Erdogan's party has organized counter protests for the weekend to give a voice to Turkey's "quiet majority to the people and the world," he said. 
They will show the international community "a real, true picture of Turkey."
Two rallies will be held away from anti-government protests to avoid possible confrontations, he said.
International criticism
Erdogan also dealt a slap to the European Union for a resolution it passed Thursday condemning his country's police crackdown on protesters and the suppression of opposition voices.
"The European Parliament's decisions about us, I am not recognizing those decisions," he said.
The comments triggered a thunderous standing ovation and roaring cheers from party members.
For years, Turkey has expressed the desire to become a member of the European Union.
Experts and human rights groups say his government lags when it comes to human rights and freedom of expression by opponents.
"Prosecutors and courts continued to use terrorism laws to prosecute and prolong incarceration of thousands of Kurdish political activists, human rights defenders, students, journalists and trade unionists," Human Rights Watch wrote in a 2013 report on Turkey.
Turkish journalists are afraid to write anything critical of the government, and media companies are slapped with huge tax fines for covering uncomfortable topics.
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, Turkish authorities have targeted journalists with detention for covering the protests.
Harsh actions against protesters could strain Erdogan's strategic friendships with much of the West -- relationships that are particularly critical in light of the civil war ravaging neighboring Syria.
Turkey is a NATO ally with a democratically-elected government.


Man due in court charged with defacing portrait of Queen Elizabeth II
London (CNN) -- A man accused of defacing a portrait of Queen Elizabeth II with paint at Westminster Abbey is due in court on Friday, police in London said.
Tim Haries, an electrician from South Yorkshire, has been charged with causing criminal damage over £5,000, Metropolitan Police said.
The 41-year-old suspect was arrested on Thursday soon after the damage to the painting was reported. 
He will appear before Westminster Magistrates' Court.
The portrait, by the Australian-born artist Ralph Heimans, has been taken down, the abbey said in a statement Thursday.
"Until work can be done to remedy the damage it will -- very regrettably -- not be possible to have the painting on public view," it said.
The portrait went on show in the Chapter House last month as part of the abbey's celebrations for the 60th anniversary of the queen's coronation.
The 9-foot by 11-foot oil painting depicts the queen in state dress, including the crimson velvet robe she wore for her coronation in 1953, in an imagined scene at night in the abbey.
According to the abbey website, it captures the queen "in a moment of solitary reflection."
Last week, the queen and other royals attended a service at the abbey to mark 60 years since her coronation there.
There have been 38 coronations at Westminster Abbey since the coronation of William the Conqueror in 1066.
Westminster Abbey is also where Prince William married Catherine Middleton in 2011. 


US Supreme Court says human DNA cannot be patented
Human genes may not be patented, but artificially copied DNA can be claimed as intellectual property, the US Supreme Court has ruled unanimously.
The court quashed patents held by a Utah-based firm on two genes linked to breast and ovarian cancer.
The opinion said DNA came from nature and was not eligible for patenting.
The US biotechnology industry had warned any blanket ban on such patents would jeopardise huge investment in gene research and therapies.
"We hold that a naturally occurring DNA segment is a product of nature and not patent eligible merely because it has been isolated," Justice Clarence Thomas wrote in Thursday's opinion.
But his ruling said that synthetic molecules known as complementary DNA can be patented "because it is not naturally occurring".
'Different chemical structure'
Myriad Genetics, the company at the heart of the lawsuit, saw its shares rise after Thursday's compromise decision.
The legal battle was prompted by a lawsuit from the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) in 2009 that centred on whether companies should be able to patent genes.
Currently, researchers and private companies work to isolate genes in order to use them in tests for gene-related illnesses, and in emerging gene therapies.
The genes at the centre of the lawsuit are linked to breast and ovarian cancer. 
Myriad Genetics developed a pioneering test to look for mutations in those genes that might increase the risk of developing cancer.
Myriad, based in Salt Lake City, argued that the genes in question had been "isolated" by the company, making them products of human ingenuity and therefore patentable.
But the ACLU argued that genes are products of nature, and therefore cannot be patented under US laws.
In 2010 a New York federal court ruled in favour of the ACLU.
But an appeals court on two separate occasions sided with Myriad. 
It said DNA isolated from the human body had a "markedly different chemical structure" from other human genetic material.
Thursday's Supreme Court ruling largely sided with the ACLU.
"Genes and the information they encode are not patent eligible... simply because they have been isolated from the surrounding genetic material," Justice Thomas wrote.
In a concurring opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia wrote "the portion of the DNA isolated from its natural state sought to be patented is identical to that portion of the DNA in its natural state".
Sandra Park, a lawyer for the ACLU, welcomed the decision.
"Because of this ruling, patients will have greater access to genetic testing and scientists can engage in research on these genes without fear of being sued," she said.
Universities and medical research firms have been able to claim intellectual property over human genes for nearly three decades.
According to researchers at Weill Cornell Medical College in the US, patents now cover some 40% of the human genome. 


Supreme Court rejects gene patents
In unanimous ruling, justices declare that human genes are a product of nature and cannot be patented and held for profit.
WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court ruled that human genes are a product of nature and cannot be patented and held for profit, a decision that medical experts said will lead to more genetic testing for cancers and other diseases and to lower costs for patients.
In a unanimous ruling Thursday, the nine justices declared that human genes are not an invention, so they cannot be claimed as a type of private property.
The decision invalidates a Utah company's patents on two genes that are linked to breast and ovarian cancer, and is likely to lead to several thousand other gene patents being tossed as well.
"This is a landmark decision," said Dr. Stanley Robboy, president of the College of American Pathologists. 
"Genomic medicine has the potential to be a cornerstone of medical testing, treatment and clinical integration, but the question of who owns your genes needed a definitive answer. Now we have it."
The broad reach of the court's decision goes well beyond genetic testing for cancer.
Dr. Wayne Grody, a UCLA medical geneticist, said he planned to add a host of genetic tests — including genes for congenital hearing loss, spinocerebellar ataxia and various muscular dystrophies — "right back on our test menu" for patients at UCLA.
Indeed, competitors to Myriad Genetics Inc. in Salt Lake City, which held patents on the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes and a monopoly on testing for the genes, cropped up quickly Thursday.
Stanford Cardiologist Euan Ashley, whose laboratory researches the genetic basis to heart disease, said he received two slickly produced marketing emails from laboratories announcing they were jumping into the niche of sequencing the genes.
"They obviously had it ready to go," he said.
Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, writing for the court, left little room for doubt about the justices' view.
"Myriad did not create anything," he wrote. 
"To be sure, it found an important and useful gene, but separating that gene from its surrounding genetic material is not an act of invention."
For Dr. Harry Ostrer, who brought the action against Myriad, the decision "will have an immediate impact on people's health."
"This will drive down the costs of genetic testing. It should open up the competition and improve the quality of testing," said Ostrer, a professor of pathology and genetics at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York.
Ostrer sued to challenge Myriad's gene patents when the company tried to block him from testing patients who had the genetic mutation that put them at high risk for breast or ovarian cancer. 
Myriad said patients could use only its test — at a cost of more than $3,000.
The court's decision also came as a relief to much of the biotech industry. 
While the justices agreed a "naturally occurring DNA segment" cannot be patented, they also said DNA "synthetically created" in a lab is an invention that can be patented.
Industry lawyers had worried the court could issue a sweeping decision that would wipe out patents for genetically engineered drugs or farm products, on the theory they were derived from or copied from natural genes.
The stock prices of Myriad and some other biotech companies initially went up Thursday when it was clear the court had not undercut all gene-related patents. 
Myriad shares, which soared 12% early, ended up losing $1.91, or 5.6%, to $32.01.
"The worst fears of the biotechnology industry have not been realized, and inventions in the field of molecular genetics remain patent eligible," said Gregory Dolin, co-director for the Center for Medicine and Law at the University of Baltimore School of Law.
Striking down gene patents had become a rallying cry for cancer patients and their doctors. 
The nation's major medical groups had urged the court to rein in the patent office and free doctors and researchers from the hold placed on so-called patented genes.
Last month, actress Angelina Jolie put a national spotlight on the problem by disclosing that she had a "faulty" gene, as she described it. 
She said she had a double mastectomy after learning she had inherited a dangerous mutation in the BCRA1 gene for which Myriad had the patent.
Jolie said her doctors told her she had a 87% risk of developing breast cancer and a 50% risk of ovarian cancer. 
Myriad also held a patent for the BRCA2 gene, another indicator of breast and ovarian cancer.
"I'm very happy," Raluca Kurz, a genetic counselor with Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, said about the court's decision. 
"I think we've all been waiting for this to happen for a long time."
Roughly 80% of Cedars' genetic testing for cancer involves the BRCA genes, Kurz said. 
But Myriad's $3,300 sticker price for the tests blocked many eligible women without insurance from getting screened. 
And the price has risen incrementally over the past several years, Kurz said.
"It was very disheartening and heartbreaking because we had families that couldn't afford the test," she said.
The court's opinion said the "average American woman has a 12% to 13% risk of developing breast cancer, but for women with certain genetic mutations, the risk can range from 50% to 80% for breast cancer and 20% to 50% for ovarian cancer."
But it will take scientists years to catch up with the data and analysis that Myriad Genetics has been able to accumulate during the 17 years it held a U.S. monopoly on the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, said Eric Topol, director of the Scripps Translational Science Institute in La Jolla.
"This is like a non-issue for them because they own the treasure chest" of information, he said. 
"They've been mission control for all these years and I don't think people realize that."
The patent would have expired in 2015, he said.
Myriad has been conducting tests on some 250,000 women annually, including relatives of clients seeking the testing, and those tests have given the company valuable insight into the populations carrying variations of the genes, Topol said.
He pointed out that the court's decision did not address that data and the analysis that resulted from it, which he and others said should be made public.
The ruling is the latest to reflect the high court's growing skepticism about the nation's patent system. 
Patents are supposed to spur innovation by giving inventors an exclusive license to profit for up to 20 years from what they have created.
Critics have said that granting too many patents in a fast-changing area of technology can discourage innovation if one company has legal control over an area and can charge monopoly profits and keep out competitors.
The justices in the past decade have taken up the issue and issued a series of unanimous rulings rejecting the views of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and the federal courts that handle patent claims.
The justices have said that supposed "inventors" cannot obtain patents for claimed innovations that are obvious or rely on natural laws such as gravity or natural processes such as chemical reactions in the body.
In Thursday's opinion, the justices said that parts of the human body — whether a kidney or a tiny gene — cannot be patented even if it takes great skill to isolate this body part.
In a one-paragraph concurring opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia said he could not vouch for the "fine details of molecular biology" set out in Thomas's opinion, but agreed with the conclusion that DNA "in its natural state" cannot be patented.


A350 marks new phase in aero-engines
A UK aircraft engine claimed to be the most efficient in the world faced its toughest test on Friday.
A Trent XWB, produced by Rolls Royce, was fitted to the new Airbus A350, which made its debut flight from Toulouse, France.
The new engine includes novel technologies designed to shave off weight and minimise fuel consumption.
It is the latest twist in the fierce contest between Airbus and Boeing, which recently launched its Dreamliner.
And to that battlefield, you can also add Rolls-Royce and its US rival General Electric.
Orders for aero engines are worth billions so the competition to win customers is intense.
The Trent XWB was custom-designed for A350, and more than 1,200 of engines have so far been requested.
BBC News was given rare access to the Rolls-Royce factory in Derby to watch the production process.
The first striking feature is the sheer scale of the machine - the diameter of the set of fan blades at the front of the engine is 118 inches (299cm), the largest ever made by the British company and roomy enough to accommodate the fuselage of a Concorde.
The blades themselves, made of titanium, are hollow and strengthened inside by a microscopically small grid construction. 
GE has opted for fan blades made of composite materials.
The size of the fan enables the engine to suck in enough air to fill a squash court every second, and then squeeze it to the size of a fridge-freezer - what's known as a "compression ratio" of 50 to 1, the highest pressure Rolls-Royce has yet attained.
The larger the flow of air into the engine, and the greater the potential compression, the better the efficiency of the whole process.
When the mix of fuel and air is ignited, the resulting gas reaches an extraordinary temperature of 2,200C - a higher level than has been achieved before - which is meant to maximise the output of each drop of fuel.
The searing heat of 2,200C is in fact 700C hotter than the melting point of the components in the combustion chamber - including the turbine blades that are driven by this fast-expanding gas.
So each blade is drilled with a network of 300 tiny holes about the size of a human hair. 
This allows cooling air to flow in a thin film over the turbines' surface and act as a form of insulation.
To withstand this exceptional heat - and the massive pressures involved - the 68 turbine blades are made of a nickel-based alloy and are grown in a single crystal to avoid the risk of any internal fissures becoming sources of weakness.
The result is that each blade, driven by the expanding gases, generates as much power as a Formula One car, spinning an internal shaft that drives the massive fan blades at the engine's front.
According to Chris Young, director of the XWB project, the engine is the result of several years of work by scientists and engineers seeking a series of incremental improvements.
"There are a large number of individual technologies in there, individual system designs which contribute a per cent here, half-a-percent there, a few tenths there.
"We've managed to deploy all the latest technologies on the engine - it's the most recently developed, and by putting all that together it's the world's most efficient."
On average, aircraft engines have become about 1% more fuel-efficient every year for the past two decades.
The claims by Rolls Royce will inevitably be followed by similar assertions by GE when its next engines are unveiled.
Airlines facing rising fuel prices are desperate to reduce costs, and the aviation industry as a whole is also under pressure to minimize its carbon emissions.
But as the latest generations of engines become more efficient, any reductions in greenhouse gases are outweighed by the global growth in air traffic, especially in Asia. 
Dr Peter Hollingsworth, lecturer in aerospace engineering at Manchester University, said that basic physics meant that there were likely to be limits to how much more efficiency could be extracted from existing designs.
"It's a real challenge. With aviation growing at the rate it's growing, there's not a whole lot you can do. You can do the 1-2% average so over a number of years you get 20% but even that's a real challenge. Now that engines are a lot more efficient, a 20% improvement isn't worth as much as it was, so you're always working with diminishing returns and, at the same time, aviation is growing."
The aviation industry has set itself a target of a 50% reduction in carbon emissions by 2050 compared with 2005 levels - and there's a recognition that that will only be achievable with a revolutionary shift in designs.
Among the ideas being considered are engines that are embedded within the wings and contra-rotating propellers.
Alan Newby, chief engineer for advanced projects at Rolls-Royce, said: "Ultimately, if we're going to make these radical changes then the aircraft will have to starting looking different.
"It's probably not in the 2020s but beyond 2030 if we're going to achieve the targets we need to get for our customers and the environment."


Airbus A350 successfully completes maiden test flight
The newest aircraft from European planemaker Airbus has successfully completed its maiden test flight.
The Airbus A350 is designed to be more fuel-efficient, and a direct competitor to US rival Boeing's 787 Dreamliner.
It is seen as vital to the future of Airbus, which competes with Boeing to supply the majority of the world's airlines with new planes.
It took off from Blagnac airstrip in the French city of Toulouse, where the A350 is assembled, on Friday morning.
The plane made a four-hour trip and landed back at Toulouse shortly after 1pm.
Boeing's Dreamliner has proved popular since its first flight in 2009, despite recently being grounded by regulators over safety fears relating to its batteries.
Major milestone
Airlines are being squeezed by high fuel costs and falling passenger numbers, and are looking for more fuel-efficient aircraft.
Airbus claims the A350, powered by Rolls-Royce Trent XWB engines, will use about 25% less fuel than previous generation wide-bodied aircraft.
Like the Dreamliner, the A350 is made largely of advanced materials, particularly carbon composites, in order to save weight.
Airbus has already taken more than 600 orders for the new plane, whereas there have been 890 Dreamliner orders so far.
The company hopes to start delivering the first A350s to customers by the end of 2014.
Analysts say a successful test flight would be a major milestone for Airbus in the A350 project, with major aircraft manufacturing projects frequently beset by delays.
"All recent programmes before it, both by Airbus, Boeing and others, have had reasonably horrendous technical problems and delays," said Nick Cunningham, an aviation analyst at the London-based Agency Partners, speaking to French agency AFP.
"So every time you hit a milestone (such as a test flight), it's good news because it means that you've missed an opportunity to have another big delay."
The plane's wings were designed at an Airbus facility in Filton near Bristol, and are manufactured at Broughton in Wales.


Banned pesticides may be having wider environmental impacts
A new report indicates that a class of pesticides linked to the deaths of bees may be harming other wildlife species.
Neonicotinoids have now been banned by the European Union because of concerns over bee health.
But this latest review of the scientific data suggests the chemicals pose a risk to soil, water and grain-eating birds such as partridge.
Prof Dave Goulson of Sussex University has published his assessment in the Journal of Applied Ecology.
"It seems to me that we may have been focussing far too much on bees and have missed the bigger picture," he told BBC News.
Neonicotinoids are systemic poisons. 
They are usually applied as coatings to seeds and as the plant grows, every part of it becomes toxic to insects and other pests.
Introduced in the mid 1990s, the chemicals, which include imidacloprid, were taken up widely in agriculture and are now the world's most prominent group of pesticides. 
But although they were heralded as having less of an impact on the environment when they were first developed, concerns have been growing for several years about their impact on bees.
Pervasive problems
Earlier this year, the European Union agreed to a two-year moratorium on their use from December. 
It would only apply to crops that flower and that are attractive to bees, such as oilseed rape.
Now scientists are looking to see if this group of chemicals pose other threats.
"These compounds are highly toxic to all insects," Prof Goulson said. 
"They are probably pervasive in the environment, as they last a long time and because they are in water and in soil."
In his review, the Sussex researcher found that 90% of the active ingredients in these chemicals go into the soil and leach into groundwater. 
They can accumulate in soil at concentrations far higher than those that kill bees and persist there for up to 10 years.
In water, less than one part per billion of imidacloprid is sufficient to kill mayflies.
Birds can also be affected by eating the coated seeds that might spill during sowing. 
Species such as partridge need only eat a few grains to get a lethal dose.
"When you try and weigh up the evidence, it seems that they harm bees, they might be harming partridge, and that they are probably getting into waterways and harming mayflies," said Prof Goulson.
"And if it turns out that the benefits are insignificant then what's the point in using them?"
Other recent studies have also shown neonicotinoids affecting the environment more than previously thought. 
Research published in the US looked at the impact on birds while in the Netherlands, data suggested a decline in aquatic populations.
Other scientists described the new work as interesting and stated that Prof Goulson was right to draw attention to the lack of assessment about the sub-lethal effects on insects.
As the author himself admits, there are still many unanswered questions, especially about the amount of damage the pesticides can do to species.
"We can show that there is pretty convincing evidence that there is a degree of harm but how big it is, I couldn't tell you, nobody could," said Prof Goulson.
Some researchers, however, are not convinced that the threats from the use of neonicotinoids are as widespread as the new review suggests.
Prof John Pickett from Rothamsted Research said that all commercial pesticides were rigorously tested for impacts on non-target species.
"If you test pesticides out of context, you are likely to find all kinds of effects but that is not necessarily indicative of a wider effect; and strict registration rules exist that are aimed at protecting the environment," he said.
"Pesticides exist to protect our crops and food from pests and while it is very important that scientists do this research, it is also important that we interpret the studies carefully in a way that balances risks and benefits."
Prof Goulson said that his review looked at research from a range of sources, including data from the agrochemical industry. 
He argued that we urgently needed more work to test soils and waterways for the presence of these chemicals and the levels at which they might be acting.
"There is every reason to believe that lots of insects are exposed to them, and we really don't know what harm they might be doing; we should find out pretty damn quick if you ask me." 


Lochalsh and Skye cuckoos fitted with satellite tags
Four cuckoos have been caught at sites in Lochalsh and Skye and fitted with satellite tags in an effort to track their migrations from Scotland.
The birds were trapped on the National Trust for Scotland's Kintail and Balmacara estates and Forestry Commission land at Kinloch on Skye.
Staff from the British Trust for Ornithology fitted the transmitters.
Two out of five cuckoos tagged in the Trossachs in 2012 survived their migration to Africa's Congo Basin.
The Lochalsh and Skye birds are now the most northerly in Britain to be tracked to date.
'A refuge'
John Calladine, of the BTO, said cuckoos were once common and widespread across Britain before declining in numbers in some parts of the country.
He said: "Being able to follow their individual movements to the Congo Basin and back is inherently fascinating.
"An important part of this work will be in identifying areas and habitats used by the birds throughout the year, even across years.
"It will help towards identifying reasons as to why the north and west has become a refuge for these and other species and suggest ways to ensure that remains the case."


Oxygen mystery: How marine mammals hold their breath
Scientists say they have solved the mystery of one of the most extreme adaptations in the animal kingdom: how marine mammals store enough oxygen to hold their breath for up to an hour.
The team studied myoglobin, an oxygen-storing protein in mammals' muscles and found that, in whales and seals, it has special "non-stick" properties.
This allowed the animals to pack huge amounts of oxygen into their muscles without "clogging them up".
The findings are published in Science.
Dr Michael Berenbrink from the Institute of Integrative Biology at the University of Liverpool took part in the study.
He said that scientists had long wondered how marine mammals managed to pack so much of this vital protein into their bodies.
"At high enough concentrations, [proteins] tend to stick together, so we tried to understand how seals and whales evolved higher and higher concentrations of this protein in their muscles without a loss of function," he told BBC News.
The team extracted pure myoglobin from the muscles of mammals - from the land-based cow, to the semi-aquatic otter, all the way up elite divers like the sperm whale.
Led by researcher Scott Mirceta, this painstaking examination traced the changes in myoglobin in deep-diving mammals through 200 million years of evolutionary history.
And it revealed that the best mammalian breath-holding divers had evolved a non-stick variety of myoglobin.
The secret, Dr Berenbrink explained, was a subtle but crucial piece of chemical trickery; marine mammal myoglobin is positively charged. 
This has important physical consequences. 
Dr Berenbrink explained: "Like the similar poles of a magnet; the proteins repel one another."
"In this way we think the animals are able to pack really high concentrations of these proteins into their muscles and avoid them sticking together and clogging up the muscles."
Dr Berenbrink said he was excited by the discovery because it helped make sense of the incredible changes that took place in mammals' bodies as they evolved from land-based animals to the aquatic, air-breathing creatures that inhabit the oceans today.
It showed, he said, the physiological change that accompanied the land to water transition of mammals.
"It also allows us to estimate the dive times of the ancient ancestors of whales," Dr Berenbrink explained.
"We can look the fossils and predict the dive times they had."
Understanding exactly how mammals' bodies store oxygen so efficiently could also aid medical research.
Copying this bit of natural chemistry could aid the development of oxygen-carrying liquids that would deliver emergency supplies of oxygen to a person's tissues when a blood transfusion is not possible.
But its biggest impact will be in the realm of evolutionary biology. 
Nicholas Pyenson, curator of fossil marine mammals at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington DC, said that the study was an exciting advancement for understanding the evolution of deep-diving.
"The idea that we can estimate maximal dive times for early diverging relatives of today's marine mammals will have a profound impact on how we think about their ancient ecology and biology," he told BBC News.
Professor Michael Fedak from the University of St Andrews' Sea Mammal Research Unit pointed out that myoglobin was only "part of the story" of how marine mammals were able to dive.
"But it's an important part," he said.
The scientist, who was not involved in this study, explained that a great deal of research at the moment was looking into how marine mammals manage to survive repeatedly cutting off and re-establishing the blood supply to their body tissues, something he likened to repeatedly suffering a crush injury.
"But being able to pick up a few [fossilised] bones of an extinct marine mammal and estimate its dive time from that - that's miraculous."


ExxonMobil faces federal lawsuit over Arkansas oil spill
The company's Pegasus pipeline split in March, releasing 210,000 gallons into waterways and a neighborhood in the small town of Mayflower.
WASHINGTON — The Justice Department and the state of Arkansas filed suit against the oil giant ExxonMobil over a March 29 pipeline rupture that spilled 210,000 gallons of oil into a residential neighborhood and waterways in the small town of Mayflower.
The spill prompted evacuations, killed wildlife, polluted wetlands and a lake, and stirred health complaints from people living near the rupture site, north of Little Rock.
In the suit filed in federal district court, the Justice Department seeks civil penalties for violations of the Clean Water Act. 
The Arkansas attorney general is also pursuing civil penalties for violations of the Arkansas Hazardous Waste Management Act and the Arkansas Water and Air Pollution Control Act. 
The state also seeks to have ExxonMobil pay for all cleanup and removal costs under the federal Oil Pollution Act.
The ExxonMobil Pegasus pipeline split open just as the Obama administration entered the final phases of review for the far bigger, controversial Keystone XL pipeline, handing ammunition to opponents who say that Keystone's path from Canada through major rivers such as the Platte and the Missouri and over the Ogallala aquifer, the main freshwater source for the Great Plains, could lead to a catastrophe.
The cleanup continues in Mayflower, where none of the 22 families evacuated on North Starlite Drive has returned home. 
The neighborhood is a "sea of 'For sale' signs," said Glen Hooks, senior campaign representative for the Sierra Club in Arkansas.
"This spill disrupted lives and damaged our environment," said Arkansas Atty. Gen. Dustin McDaniel. 
"It sullied our previously pristine water and our clean air. As the party responsible for this incident, Exxon is also responsible for the penalties imposed by the state for the damage to our environment, and the company should foot the bill for the state's cleanup costs."
ExxonMobil said it had not been served the complaint, so it could not respond to the charges.
"All I can say at this time is that we are aware of the filing; however, we have yet to review the allegations," said spokesman Aaron Stryk. 
"That said, we will continue to cooperate with all federal, state and local agencies."
In the wake of the Mayflower spill, Arkansas officials and residents have petitioned ExxonMobil to re-route a 13-mile portion of the Pegasus pipeline out of the watershed for Little Rock's drinking-water source, Lake Maumelle. 
The company has not yet made a decision.
The 850-mile-long Pegasus pipeline carried about 95,000 barrels a day. 
Keystone XL would carry more than 800,000, making the consequences of a spill potentially far greater.
Keystone's supporters point out that while the Pegasus pipeline is more than 60 years old, Keystone XL would be outfitted with state-of-the-art spill prevention and alert technology. 
But in April, the Environmental Protection Agency faulted the State Department, which is responsible for issuing the federal permit, for not demanding more spill safeguards in the Keystone XL project.
Around the time of the Arkansas spill in March, ExxonMobil was fined $1.7 million by the federal government for pipeline safety violations relating to a 2011 spill of about 63,000 gallons of oil into the Yellowstone River in Montana.
If the court rules against ExxonMobil, it would be liable under the Clean Water Act for $1,100 for each barrel spilled, or more than $4,300 per barrel if the court determines that the spill occurred due to gross negligence or misconduct.
The spill released an estimated 5,000 barrels into Mayflower. 
Under Arkansas law, the company could be charged an additional $10,000 per violation per day for every day that oil is in the environment, according to the complaint.


Call to 'let UK government scientists off the leash'
One of the UK's most influential science communicators is pressing the government to let more of its scientists speak to the media.
Fiona Fox, chief executive of the Science Media Centre (SMC), has said that the views of some of the UK's leading experts are not being heard.
She believes that the quality of public debate is suffering as a result, especially during national emergencies.
The government rejects the claim that access to its scientists is difficult.
"Some of the scientists who are advising government are amongst the best in the UK," Ms Fox told BBC News.
"Yet, all too often, their voices are lost to the public and the media."
Ms Fox is arguing for a loosening of restrictions and a change in a culture that she believes can make it difficult to report the views of the country's leading experts.
"Most researchers now see speaking to the public as a crucial part of their role," she said. 
"Government scientists stand out as a stark exception to that new culture and the SMC feels it is in our remit to raise questions about whether it has to be this way."
The Science Media Centre's stated role is to get science into the public domain through the media when controversial topics hit the headlines.
Often this is through the involvement of "arm's-length" bodies - government organisations with a degree of independence.
But Ms Fox said she had not always been able to have access to the best experts - or if she has, government departments have on occasion interfered.
Ash dieback
Last November, for example, when there was concern over ash dieback, a senior scientist working for Forest Research, a government arm's-length agency, gave a live interview to the BBC News Channel after being involved in an SMC briefing.
Minutes later, the scientist received a message to the effect that the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) was not happy that she had given an interview, and asked her not to accept requests for another.
After the BBC News team insisted that it wanted the scientist from Forrest Research, a Defra press officer spoke to her about what she should say. 
Badger cull
BBC News experienced difficulties last September when one of the country's leading scientists, Lord Krebs, told BBC News that pilot badger culling trials were, in his words, "a crazy scheme" because there was no reliable estimate of the badger population in the proposed cull areas. 
The scientists that could confirm or refute Lord Krebs' concerns were researchers working for the Food and Environment Research Agency (Fera), another arm's-length body associated with Defra.
BBC News called the Defra press office several times over two weeks, each time to be told by the press officer that he was still trying to set something up. 
In the end, no-one got back to the news team.
A few weeks later, the trials were postponed because of evidence from Fera that the population estimates for the proposed cull areas had been unreliable.
According to James Wilsdon, a professor of science and democracy at Sussex University, it is important for government departments to be more open with the research that leads them towards policy decisions.
"I wouldn't say that this [example is illustrative of] a major shift but more of a clash of cultures, and clearly there is a ministerial line-up at Defra that is a bit less amenable to some aspects of scientific opinion than previous [line-ups]," he told BBC News.
When BBC News put these examples to Defra, a spokesman said: "Our independent scientists have always been made available to the media when possible for background briefings and interviews on a range of subjects, including bovine TB, ash dieback and the decline in bees.
"To suggest that access to our expert scientists is difficult is far from accurate."
Fukushima
During the Fukushima nuclear accident in 2011, there was intense interest and concern about the effects of radiation.
The SMC put up independent experts to do interviews on the subject with the media. 
But Ms Fox said that several of the experts that were brought in to advise the government told the SMC that they felt unable to do further media interviews.
Some organisations contacted by the SMC claimed this was because of instructions from the government's Cabinet Office, which was overseeing the crisis.
Volcanic ash
Independent scientists joining committees advising government during national emergencies, such as volcanic ash or swine flu, are often required to sign the Official Secrets Act and other non-disclosure agreements. 
While these experts are told they can speak to the media if they steer clear of sensitive information, many worry that they might let something slip.
As a result, they often refuse media interviews, according to Ms Fox.
"We had a huge number of scientists on the volcanic ash story about whether we should be grounding aeroplanes. 
But when they were appointed formally to advise the government, two or three phoned us up to say, 'sorry, no, I won't be able to do any more interviews'."
Downing Street interference
Interference from government and at times from the prime minister's staff stretches back a long way. 
In 2008, officials working for the then premier Gordon Brown attempted to delay an SMC briefing on a detailed, government-led scientific report on mental health put together by hundreds of independent academics.
"We were told that special advisers at Number 10 thought that a short section about the economic recession and mental health would lead to awkward questions during Prime Minister's Questions," Ms Fox said.
Comparison with Canada
In Canada, several government departments are currently under investigation by the country's information commission for allegedly "muzzling" scientists.
Requests for interviews with scientists working for the Canadian federal government have frequently been turned down as a consequence of a media protocol introduced in 2008.
This directive explicitly states that press officers should ensure that the minister is not embarrassed and that the interview is "along approved lines".
In the UK, there is no such overt directive. 
But according to Ms Fox, practices in the UK can have similar effects.
"There is no systematic attempt to silence government scientists, but many feel they can't speak to the media - especially in the midst of a crisis or where the science is contested," she said.
Prof Wilsdon has similar concerns: "Some of these examples are a worrying sign that there has been a tightening of restrictions, and constraints on the open and free discussion of the science that I would say should take place in a more public way. So I would be worried."


Men 'to blame for the menopause'
Hot flushes, night sweats, mood swings - menopause and its side effects can all be blamed on men, experts suggest.
Evolutionary geneticists from Canada's McMaster University say men's tendency to choose younger mates meant fertility became pointless for older women.
In PLOS Computational Biology, they say this eventually led to the menopause.
But a UK expert said that was the "wrong way round" and men chose younger women because older women were less fertile.
'Preferential mating'
Researchers have long been puzzled as to why it appears that human are the only species where females cannot reproduce throughout their lives.
Previous theories had proposed a "grandmother effect". 
This suggests that women lose their fertility at an age where they might not live to see a child grow, and instead are available to care for younger women's children.
The menopause was therefore seen as the block to older women from continuing to reproduce.
But this latest theory suggests things work the other way around, and that it is the lack of reproduction that has given rise to menopause.
Using computer modelling, the team from McMaster's concluded "preferential mating" was the evolutionary answer - men of all ages choosing younger women as partners.
That meant there was "no purpose" in older women continuing to be fertile.
Prof Rama Singh, an evolutionary geneticist who led the study, said men choosing younger mates were "stacking the odds" against continued fertility.
He told the BBC: "There is evidence in human history; there was always a preference for younger women."
Prof Singh stressed they were looking at human development many thousands of years ago - rather than current social patterns,
'Evolved response'
In the UK, the average age for women to go through the menopause is now 52 even though the average woman goes on to live for another 30 years.
Prof Singh said this extended longevity - plus later childbirth - could potentially alter the timing of the menopause, over a significant period of time.
"The social system is changing. There are women who are starting families later, because of education or a career."
He suggested this trend would mean those women would have a later menopause, and those genes would be passed on to their daughters "with the possibility of menopausal age being delayed".
However Dr Maxwell Burton-Chellew, an evolutionary biologist in the department of zoology at the University of Oxford, challenged the theory.
"The authors argue that the menopause exists in humans because males have a strong preference for younger females.
"However, this is probably the wrong way round - the human male preference for younger females is likely to be because older females are less fertile.
"I think it makes more sense to see the human male preference for younger females largely as an evolved response to the menopause, and to assume that ancestral males would have been wise to mate with any females that could produce offspring."
He added: "Evolutionarily-speaking, older females faced an interesting 'choice': have a child that may not reach adulthood before your own death, or stop reproducing and instead focus on helping your younger relatives reproduce."


New Structure Found in Human Cornea
The discovery of a thin, durable layer near the back of the cornea may lead to safer corneal surgeries.
At a mere 15 microns thick, an incredibly strong layer has been discovered sandwiched within the human cornea. 
The new layer is called Dua’s layer, after its discoverer Harminder Dua, an ophthalmologist at the University of Nottingham. 
Dua and his team published their findings in the journal Ophthalmology.
Previously, the human cornea, which is approximately 550 microns thick, was thought to be comprised of five layers: from front to back, the corneal epithelium, Bowman’s layer, the corneal stroma, Descemet’s membrane, and the corneal endothelium. 
Based on clinical experience with corneal transplants, Dua suspected a layer existed between the corneal stroma and Descemet’s membrane. 
To prove the existence of this layer, Dua’s team carried simulated corneal transplantations on several donated human eyes. 
These surgeries typically involve first separating corneal layers by pumping small air bubbles in between them and then removing and replacing the diseased layer. 
By injecting even smaller bubbles, the scientists were able to reveal the new Dua’s layer, whose unique structure they confirmed with electron microscopy.
The discovery may bring about improved outcomes for patients undergoing corneal grafts and transplants. 
Because Dua’s layer, composed primarily of collagen, is so strong, surgeons performing certain types of corneal surgeries could plan to inject air closer to this layer, rather than near more fragile layers that are more prone to tearing.
The discovery could also advance the understanding and treatment of several cornea diseases, including acute hydrops, Descematocele, and pre-Descemet’s dystrophies.
“This is a major discovery that will mean that ophthalmology textbooks will literally need to be re-written,” said Dua in a statement. 
“Having identified this new and distinct layer deep in the tissue of the cornea, we can now exploit its presence to make operations much safer and simpler for patients. 
From a clinical perspective, there are many diseases that affect the back of the cornea which clinicians across the world are already beginning to relate to the presence, absence or tear in this layer.”


Nicaragua canal project is approved despite few details
Critics accuse President Daniel Ortega of pushing through the sea-to-sea Nicaragua canal project to benefit his family and inner circle.
MEXICO CITY — The project is of mind-boggling proportions: It would cost $40 billion, take a decade to complete and be more than twice the length of the mighty Panama Canal.
Yet on Thursday, the Nicaraguan legislature controlled by President Daniel Ortega approved just such a plan, for a sea-to-sea canal from the Pacific to the Caribbean, with a little-known Chinese firm footing much of the bill.
Proponents say the canal megaproject could bring to Nicaragua and the region a major share of the expanding global maritime trade business, especially from U.S. and Asian markets, worth trillions of dollars.
By creating competition for Panama Canal traffic, it could lower the cost of shipping for major American importers such as Wal-Mart and could become a tourism destination for cruise lines. 
It also could siphon off some business from West Coast ports in the United States by making it easier for Asian companies to reach the East Coast.
Despite the grandiose scale, Ortega revealed few details to the public and fast-tracked a bill granting the concession to build and manage the canal. 
The measure sailed through the legislature with little debate or scrutiny and was approved by a 61-25 vote and one abstention, with one Ortega supporter arguing in the National Assembly that failure to approve the project would be unpatriotic.
Ortega has said the project will provide tens of thousands of jobs for Nicaraguans and dramatically improve the economy in one of the hemisphere's poorest nations, perhaps even doubling the GDP by 2020.
But the lack of transparency, which critics say is typical of Ortega's secretive way of governing, has raised innumerable doubts about the canal, its real benefits, its potential environmental toll and whether another such waterway is really necessary so close to Panama's.
Many Nicaraguans suspect that the project, which grants a 100-year concession to the newly formed Hong Kong-based HK Nicaragua Canal Development Investment Co. (HKND Group) to operate the canal, is another example of Ortega cutting a deal to earn millions of dollars for his family and inner circle.
"He is selling off the national patrimony, without firing a single shot," said Carlos Langrand, an opposition congressman who opposes the deal.
Not that many in Nicaragua don't relish the idea of a canal.
In fact, for a couple of centuries, through the brazen eras of exploration and exploitation by the likes of Cornelius Vanderbilt and the filibusterers, 19th century adventurers who periodically invaded Nicaragua, Nicaraguans have nursed the dream (some would say fantasy) of carving a land-and-water route across their section of the Central American isthmus.
The dream was raised and dashed time and again. 
The opening of the Panama Canal in 1914 seemed to relegate the idea to the realm of fanciful musings. 
Nicaraguan politicians started floating the idea again in the 1990s but the last serious set of studies was shelved in 2006.
Now, Ortega, taking advantage of his steady takeover of nearly all the decision-making institutions in the country, has revived the dream in hope, perhaps, of sealing what he sees as his legacy.
Opponents are not convinced and staged a small protest outside the National Assembly building Thursday as legislators discussed the project.
"Despite this having been the dream of Nicaraguans for more than 150 years, the way this is being approved without consultation is unacceptable," Langrand, the legislator, said by telephone from Managua, the Nicaraguan capital. 
"Without taking into consideration environmental issues, without taking into consideration the impact on towns along the route, nor the impact on indigenous communities and protected biospheres."
In fact, a lot of behind-the-scenes work has gone on in preparing the project that ordinary Nicaraguans are not aware of. 
The Chinese firm, HKND Group, says it is assembling a team of world-class consultants and engineers to work on plans. 
It is standard practice in a developing country such as Nicaragua for the concession for such an enormous project to be granted before the multimillion-dollar feasibility and environmental studies are conducted, they said.
"In Nicaragua, they don't have the funding available to do all the upfront work before they've chosen a concessionaire," HKND senior project advisor Bill Wild said in an interview from Managua. So HKND assumes the risk, he said, "but no one can do it without the certainty of [the] concession."
Several routes for the canal are under consideration. 
HKND officials say the one route that has been eliminated is a highly controversial previous proposal that would have taken the canal along the San Juan River bordering Costa Rica. 
Nicaragua and Costa Rica maintain a dispute over that border.
Any route is likely to incorporate the great Lake Nicaragua, the vast, ecologically sensitive inland water body that dominates the western half of the country.
Wild said the changing nature of maritime trade — including the increasing volume, expanding customer base in Asian markets, and the size of ships — makes the Nicaragua canal an important, bigger alternative to the Panama Canal, currently undergoing a $5.25-billion expansion. 
Especially as the United States eventually moves toward becoming an exporter of oil, the kinds of supertankers it and other suppliers would use would not fit in the Panama Canal, he said.
The Panama Canal is about 50 miles long. 
Nicaragua's version could be more than twice that and much wider.
"Up to now, nobody has taken the plunge" of building the Nicaragua canal, Wild said. 
"The timing is right now."
The megaproject is reported to include free-trade zones, deepwater ports and many miles of waterways and railroads.
HKND put up a website within the last week or so to begin explaining the project in fairly vague terms, and appointed Ronald MacLean-Abaroa, a former mayor of La Paz, in landlocked Bolivia, and World Bank official, as a spokesman to make the rounds in Managua.
HKND is owned by Chinese tycoon Wang Jing, whose vast holdings include the Xinwei Telecom Enterprise Group, which also has lucrative contracts with the Ortega government totaling more than $2 billion.
Ortega, once a leftist revolutionary leader of the Sandinista movement who battled U.S.-backed forces in the 1980s, has become an increasingly autocratic president, his critics contend.
Ousted in Nicaragua's first post-civil-war elections in 1990, he repeatedly ran for president until finally winning in 2006. 
Then, critics say, he went about stacking most of the state's institutions, including the legislature, the Supreme Court, the electoral council and the media, with his supporters. 
He largely co-opted or neutralized the business community and the church, erstwhile fierce opponents of the Sandinistas.
Ortega was elected to a third term in 2011 after orchestrating a change in rules that had imposed term limits.
What was left of Nicaragua's historically divided opposition has failed to mount much of a challenge to the canal project.
"The only opposition Ortega faces is reality," said Tim Rogers, editor of the Nicaragua Dispatch Web-based newspaper. 
"Reality is the only thing that can stop the project."


David Cameron promises £1m 'Longitude Prize' for big ideas
The UK government is putting up a £1m prize for what it calls a new "grand innovation challenge".
The award was announced by the Prime Minister David Cameron at a special summit linked to Britain's leadership of the G8 group of countries.
He said the prize should reward the "next penicillin", or the plane that could fly carbon-free to New York.
The Prime Minister likened it to the 1714 Longitude Prize that was famously won by the clockmaker John Harrison.
The Yorkshire man produced the first truly accurate marine chronometer with which to navigate safely at sea.
David Cameron said the payment should go to the idea that solved "the biggest problem of our time".
What that problem is should be identified by public. 
This, he said, would stimulate a global innovation debate.
"There are so many problems in our world that need that amazing solution, whether it is a cure for dementia, solving the problem of diabetes, having a flight from Britain to New York that's carbon free. Let's challenge the public and challenge the scientists for which is the great problem we want to crack," Mr Cameron told his audience at the Siemens Crystal Building in London.
"I'm thinking of something - Britain's Got Talent, you know, you switch on the TV and you watch the dog jumping over the pole, or whatever it is. Let's actually get the nation engaged on what the biggest problems are in science and in our lives that we need to crack, with a multi-million pound prize to then help us do that."
David Bott, from the TSB, said: "This competition aims to get the whole country thinking about how to tackle major challenges through innovation.
"That is why we are very happy to provide the initial prize money for this new venture. We hope it will galvanise the best minds in our country to think about how we can really transform our economy - and our lives - for the better."
The prize will be administered by the Technology Strategy Board (TSB), which makes targeted investments in UK companies to help bring them to market or expand their market share. 
The chair of the new "Longitude Committee" will be the English Astronomer Royal, Lord Rees.
David Cameron also used the event to launch the Information Economy Strategy, focusing on the "growth opportunities of cloud computing", which he said would help 1.6 million small and medium-sized businesses increase their online presence.
The G8 summit will take place at the Lough Erne golf resort, Enniskillen, on 17 and 18 June 2013.


Solar Impulse sets off for Washington DC via Cincinnati
A solar-powered plane aiming to cross the US coast-to-coast has set off on its fourth leg, from St Louis, Missouri, to Washington DC.
But the Solar Impulse team made a last-minute decision to stop over briefly in Cincinnati, Ohio, because of strong winds expected on the journey.
That would have pushed the travel time beyond the limit of 24 hours that has been set for the single-pilot craft.
After the 16-hour flight to Cincinnati, the team plans a pilot change.
The pilot duties on the "Across America" bid are being shared by the two leaders of the project - Swiss nationals Bertrand Piccard and Andre Borschberg.
Mr Borschberg will fly the St Louis-Cincinnati leg, with Mr Piccard taking over from there, landing some time after midnight local time (04:00 GMT).
The prior part of the journey, from Dallas to St Louis, was piloted by Mr Piccard, representing his longest flight in the vehicle to date at 21 hours, 22 minutes.
The craft holds the world record for the longest solar-powered flight at 26 hours, but the team has limited journeys in the Across America bid - billed as the first cross-continental, solar-powered flight - to 24 hours.
Heavy air traffic as well as strong head winds and cross winds expected over the Appalachian mountain range have pushed the expected full travel time to Washington beyond that limit.
It is not the first weather-related change to the project. 
Storms in the St Louis area prior to the plane's arrival damaged the hangar that was meant to house it, so the team was forced to erect a novel, inflatable hangar there.
The HB-SIA craft has the same wingspan as an Airbus A340 but weighs just 1.6 tonnes. 
Its propellers are powered by an array of lithium-ion batteries, which in the hours of daylight are charged by 12,000 solar cells that cover the craft's wings and stabiliser.
The Across America project is the last showpiece with the prototype HB-SIA aircraft before Mr Piccard and Mr Borschberg attempt a trans-oceanic flight and an eventual around-the-world flight in 2015 in the two-seat HB-SIB.
The aeroplane's other records include the first international flight of a manned solar-powered plane in 2011, and first inter-continental flight in 2012.
The aircraft completed the first leg of its trans-American bid - between San Francisco and Phoenix - in early May, in a flight lasting 18 hours.
The second leg - from Phoenix to Dallas - was completed in late May. 
This trip covered a distance of 1,541km (958mi) - again, a record for a manned solar-powered plane.
The Across America project coincides with the Piccard's and Borschberg's Clean Generation Initiative, an effort to encourage policy-makers and businesses to develop and adopt sustainable energy technologies.


Oxygen mystery: How marine mammals hold their breath
Scientists say they have solved the mystery of one of the most extreme adaptations in the animal kingdom: how marine mammals store enough oxygen to hold their breath for up to an hour.
The team studied myoglobin, an oxygen-storing protein in mammals' muscles and found that, in whales and seals, it has special "non-stick" properties.
This allowed the animals to pack huge amounts of oxygen into their muscles without "clogging them up". 


Brown retreats from conditions on university funding
The budget plan to be voted on Friday will no longer tie money to transfer enrollment numbers and other measures, which critics called rigid and unrealistic.
SACRAMENTO — Gov. Jerry Brown has backed off his proposal to tie some money for California's public universities to such requirements as improving graduation rates, enrolling more low-income students and freezing tuition for four years.
University of California and California State University officials fought Brown's carrot-and-stick approach to higher education, which the governor had embedded in his budget plan.
Brown wanted to steadily increase funding for universities over the next four years as long as they met specific conditions — ensuring more students finish their degrees on time, enrolling more transfers from community colleges and other measures — and to withhold the money if tuition was raised.
Representatives of the universities said Brown's proposals were too rigid and unrealistic after years of budget cuts, and key lawmakers agreed. 
As a result of this week's budget deal, the universities will be required simply to track the number of low-income students they have, the percentage of students who finish within four or six years, the number graduating with engineering and computer degrees and several other statistics.
The $96.3-billion spending plan scheduled for a vote in the Legislature on Friday contains $250 million more than last year for each university system — and no financial penalties. 
Both systems said they're already making progress on Brown's benchmarks and have agreed to forgo undergraduate tuition hikes for at least the coming academic year.
After that, "we are not etching anything in stone," said Dianne Klein, a UC spokeswoman. 
"Plans change from year to year."
Cal State isn't planning any tuition increases for the next two years, said spokesman Michael Uhlenkamp.
The stalling of Brown's quest to overhaul higher education is one of the year's only setbacks for the governor, who has pushed to reshape the relationship between Sacramento and public universities wary of politicians' interference. 
But he still hopes to use the promise of more money to prod the universities to run more efficiently and serve more students.
Evan Westrup, a spokesman for Brown, said that "the governor remains committed to improving the quality, performance and cost-effectiveness of California's higher-education systems." 
He said the requirement for tracking detailed information will "inform the work that's done moving forward and, ultimately, help improve higher education in California."
Brown, lawmakers and university officials will revisit his proposals later this year, another spokesman said.
State Sen. Marty Block (D-San Diego), who chairs a budget subcommittee on education, said the Legislature needed more time to consider Brown's plans, which the governor detailed in April. 
"This is fairly revolutionary," he said. 
"It's not something we want to force quickly."
Assemblywoman Susan Bonilla (D-Concord), Block's counterpart in the Assembly, said resistance to Brown's plans became evident quickly, and the governor did not appear ready to "draw a line in the sand."
Brown was already engaged in wide-ranging debates over redistributing school funding to help needier districts, expanding the state's healthcare program to comport with the federal overhaul and reining in optimistic revenue estimates — all issues in which he largely prevailed.
The budget plan also includes a proposal to help reduce tuition for students from middle-class families, a priority for Assembly Speaker John A. Pérez (D-Los Angeles).
Bonilla said she was concerned that Brown's higher-education proposal was generated by number crunchers without enough input from educators. 
During an April hearing, she said the governor made it sound "like we're talking about a factory" rather than a university.
And universities are in a rebuilding phase, she said: "I don't think that's the time to say we're going to withhold your money."
Patrick Lenz, UC's vice president of budget and capital resources, called Brown's original plan "punitive."
One element of the budget would change California's public-records laws, making some requirements for how local governments and agencies handle requests voluntary. 
Local officials would no longer have to respond to a request for documents in 10 days or provide them in an electronic format.
Administration officials say the change could help the state save tens of millions of dollars in reimbursements to local officials for complying with the laws. 
But open-government advocates are concerned that the changes would make it tougher for the media and the public to see government records.


Computer code courses for children target global expansion
A Google-backed London start-up that teaches primary school children computer coding is expanding overseas after being flooded with requests to set up spin-offs across the world.
Code Club is a not-for-profit network of after-school clubs for children aged nine to 11, teaching them how to make basic computer games and web pages.
The Shoreditch-based organisation was founded a year ago by friends Clare Sutcliffe and Linda Sandvik with funding from Google and the microchip maker Arm Holdings, and now has more than 800 volunteer-led clubs up and down the country.
The project has been endorsed by the father of the world wide web Sir Tim Berners-Lee, lastminute.com's founders Brent Hoberman and Martha Lane Fox and YouTube's founder, Chad Hurley.
Code Club yesterday announced plans to expand overseas, with the launch of Code Club World. 
The spin-off organisation will provide a curriculum, volunteering framework and support for foreign clubs.
Ms Sutcliffe, a former web designer, said: "We feel like we've got the model right now in the UK. We've had so much demand from people saying can you help me set up code clubs in my country?"
The first international clubs will be launched in Luxembourg and Kiev.
Patrick Welfringer, who will run the Luxembourg community, said: "It only takes an hour a week with the right curriculum, a teacher and a programmer to make kids code literate."
Course materials will be provided in English but Code Club has signed up volunteers to translate it into other languages.



Turkish police launch assault on protesters in Istanbul park
Firing tear gas, rubber bullets and water cannon barrages, riot police drive thousands of demonstrators out of Gezi Park. 
ISTANBUL, Turkey — Hundreds of riot police firing tear gas stormed a central Istanbul park Saturday, tearing down tents and clearing out demonstrators in a bold, if politically risky, move by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan to stem more than two weeks of antigovernment protests.
The police assault at twilight sent hundreds of protesters scurrying for cover as street clashes echoed through the city. 
The swift and overwhelming action by security forces highlighted the country's deepening political divide and the potential danger Erdogan faces in further provoking a large segment of Turks critical of what they see as his authoritarian tendencies.
But Erdogan had made it clear for days that his patience was exhausted. 
Police backed by armored vehicles moved into Gezi Park — the epicenter of rallies that have given rise to new political voices while damaging the country's international image — driving protesters from beneath sycamore trees and blocking access to adjoining Taksim Square.
Ambulances arrived outside the park as tear gas and water cannon spray enveloped the area. 
Turkey's NTV television reported that police shouted at protesters: "This is an illegal act, this is our last warning to you: Evacuate."
The police have used "a lot of tear gas and rubber bullets," said Lela Benim, a nurse at a field hospital near Gezi Park, while cleaning a thick white coating of tear gas off a man's chest. 
"This response is what we have been afraid of."
Thousands of demonstrators, who only hours earlier had vowed to hold the park, rushed into Istiklal Street, the city's main thoroughfare, chanting, "Tayyip Resign." 
The banged their fists against shuttered storefronts. 
Police responded with water cannon blasts and stun grenades.
"Some people do fight with the police — socialist factions — but the police don't discriminate between them and the rest of us" peaceful protesters, said Emre Erkaslan, wearing a hard-hat and gas mask on Istiklal Street. 
"Erdogan is the worst kind of dictator because he thinks he's actually a democrat."
The violence broke out hours after Erdogan held a mass rally in Ankara, Turkey's capital, to launch his Islamist-based Justice and Development Party's municipal election campaign for 2014. 
During the speech, he argued that the protests were being manipulated by foreign powers and criminal groups.
"I say it clearly: Taksim Square must be evacuated, otherwise this country's security forces know how to evacuate it," he told his supporters
Riot police deployed in large numbers down Tarlabasi Boulevard, which runs from Taksim Square and parallel to Istiklal, fired round after round of tear gas and rubber bullets. 
They scoured back streets, throwing tear gas grenades at men who disappeared into the shadows before re-emerging with slingshots.
"Turkey will live its darkest night if this attack lasts for more than one hour," Ali Cerkezoglu, the general secretary of the Turkish Medical Chamber, was quoted as saying by the daily Hurriyet newspaper.
Tension between police and demonstrators had eased after negotiations early Friday in which Erdogan agreed to freeze a development plan for Gezi Park pending a referendum and the outcome of court cases related to construction of a proposed Ottoman-era replica barracks and possibly a mosque and opera house.
The demonstrators, many of them young and secular with no fixed political allegiances, distrust Erdogan. 
Their environmental protest against building in the park coalesced with a growing national anger over what many see as Erdogan's heavy-handed rule and government policies increasingly influenced by Islam.
The main opposition group — Taksim Solidarity — announced in a statement Saturday that it would continue occupying the park: "We are going through a period in which the rights of people, including right to life, are trodden."
Taksim Solidarity also called for the government to investigate accusations of police brutality during the protests. 
The Turkish Medical Assn. said four people have been killed, including a policeman, and more than 5,000 injured in 18 days of unrest.
"We repeat that no serious legal action has yet been taken against those who perpetrated and oversaw the actions that lead to the killing of our friends, and … we will make sure those who are responsible for the violence are brought to justice."
A protester who gave his name only as Borak stood on a side street near Istiklal Street. 
The pop of tear gas grenade launchers rang out and Borak said the night was just beginning.
"The park belongs to the people not to Erdogan," he said. 
"We will take it back."


Turkish unions call strike after weekend of street clashes
Istanbul, Turkey (CNN) -- Turkish trade unions are aiming to put fresh pressure on Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan on Monday by holding a nationwide strike after a weekend of violent unrest in major cities.
Describing Erdogan's government as "despotic," two main union blocs say they plan to march to Istanbul's Taksim Square, which has been at the heart of more than two weeks of protests. 
It is the second time unions have called a strike to support the protest movement.
Police and anti-government demonstrators had faced off once again around Taksim Square on Sunday, a day after authorities had cleared the adjacent Gezi Park by force.
Thousands of protesters calling for Erdogan's resignation attempted to return to the square and park, only to be pushed back by police. 
The neighborhood south of the park was filled with a burning smell as police swept through the area, firing tear gas at knots of protesters in the streets.
Some groups of demonstrators have shifted to protesting in their local neighborhoods in the city, putting up barricades. 
Meanwhile, the atmosphere in confrontations between police and protesters is turning uglier.
"Now it feels like there is a level of desperation," said Clare Murray, who was vacationing in Istanbul from New York for the past week. 
"The police seem more comfortable with using aggression."
Rallies and counter-rallies
The protests started at the end of May over authorities' plans to turn Gezi Park into a mall. 
They quickly turned into large anti-government demonstrations that included calls for political reforms.
While the protests are unlikely to threaten the rule of Erdogan, who has been one of Turkey's most popular leaders and is credited with overseeing a decade of economic growth, they are raising questions about what critics say is an increasingly authoritarian style of governing.
For his part, Erdogan remains defiant, accusing outsiders of taking advantage of the protests over the park.
On Sunday, thousands of Erdogan's supporters gathered at a rally a few miles from Taksim Square. 
They waved flags and sang songs at a rally that was widely viewed as a re-election rally for the prime minister.
Erdogan sought to contrast his supporters with the protesters. 
"Hundreds of thousands in here are not like the vandals with petrol-bombs in their hands," he said.
In the capital, Ankara, authorities had warned against a gathering to honor Ethem Sarisuluk, who was shot during protests two weeks ago.
The gathering took place under a heavy police presence around Kizilay Square, in a different part of the city from where Sarisuluk's funeral was taking place.
At one point, Sarisuluk's brother knelt in the middle of the road in an attempt to stop oncoming traffic, while police fired tear gas and water cannons at demonstrators. 
The protesters, in turn, threw rocks at police and put up makeshift barricades to block off streets.
On Monday, five civil society organizations in Ankara planned to march to Kizilay Square to protest brutality by security forces.
What young Turks think of protests
A grieving mother pleads for justice
Erdogan supporters dismiss protesters
Why are Turks protesting Erdogan?
One-day strike
Following the weekend tumult, the trade unions are adding their clout to the demonstrations with the one-day strike.
Those involved have hundreds of thousands of members across sectors that include public services and utilities such as electricity and water supply. 
They don't, however, have enough members to shut those industries down altogether.
Under the Erdogan government, Turkish workers have been "domesticated like animals by being kept hungry," one worker at a union office in Istanbul said.
"Gezi park made us realize we are not animals in a herd we are individuals," said the worker, who didn't provide his name.
The previous strike during the anti-government demonstrations took place near the start of this month.
Erdogan complained Saturday that demonstrators were not meeting him halfway.
"We have reached out with our hands," he said. 
"However, some people returned their fists in response. Can you shake hands with those who reach out with a fist?"
He also ridiculed the protesters' assertions that they are environmentalists, calling them "thugs" and citing their honking of horns as evidence of "noise pollution."
He accused demonstrators of inciting sectarian violence by attacking a woman in a headscarf, kicking her, dragging her on the ground and snatching her head cover.
Erdogan praised his government's performance over the past 10 years, citing a rising standard of living, a quintupling of the central bank's reserves and plans to build an airport.
Root of protests
The unrest began in Istanbul roughly three weeks ago, when a small group of people turned out to protest government plans to bulldoze Gezi Park and replace it with a shopping mall housed inside a replica of 19th-century Ottoman barracks.
Protesters said the plans represented a creeping infringement on their rights in a secular society.
Turkey was founded after secularists defeated Islamic Ottoman forces in the early 20th century, and many modern-day secularists frown on Ottoman symbols.
The protests broadened into an outpouring in the square and throughout the country as security forces cracked down on demonstrators.
The unrest also brought political risks for Erdogan, a populist and democratically elected politician serving his third term in office.


Russia's Putin rejects Kraft Super Bowl ring claim
Vladimir Putin's spokesman has denied a report that the Russian president mistakenly pocketed a Super Bowl ring during a 2005 visit by a US tycoon.
New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft was quoted as saying he had shown Mr Putin the 4.94-carat, diamond-encrusted ring while in St Petersburg.
"I put my hand out and he put it in his pocket," Mr Kraft told an awards gala, according to the New York Post.
But the Kremlin spokesman insisted the ring had been a gift.
The ring was one of around 70 given to the Patriots team after they won Super Bowl XXXIX in February 2005, five months before Mr Kraft's trip to Russia. 
It is said to be worth $25,000 (£16.000; 18,700 euros).
'Psychoanalysts'
The Post reported last week that Mr Kraft had told a ceremony at Carnegie Hall in New York how he had wanted the ring back but had been advised by the White House to treat it as a gift.
"I took out the ring and showed it to [President Putin], and he put it on and he goes: 'I can kill someone with this ring'," the Patriots owner was quoted as saying.
Mr Putin's spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, said he had himself seen Mr Kraft present the ring to the president and suggested that any suggestion that he was put under pressure should be an issue for "detailed discussion with psychoanalysts".
"If the gentleman is really experiencing such excruciating pain from his loss... the president is ready to send him any other ring he can buy for that kind of money," he told reporters in London, where Mr Putin was having talks with UK Prime Minister David Cameron.
A Kraft Group spokesperson played down the story on Sunday, telling the Associated Press that Mr Kraft was very happy his ring was at the Kremlin and that it was a "humorous, anecdotal story that Robert retells for laughs".


Russian president: I did not steal Super Bowl ring 
Moscow (CNN) -- Russia's president is fighting back: No, he did not steal a Super Bowl ring. 
And no, he's not rocking the diamond-encrusted prize on his finger, either.
President Vladimir Putin's spokesman denied that the leader kept a Super Bowl ring that New England Patriots' owner Robert Kraft wanted back.
Both sides agree that the ring, with its 124 diamonds, changed hands during Kraft's visit to St. Petersburg, Russia, in 2005.
The New York Post reported on remarks made by Kraft, 72, at a New York awards gala Thursday.
"I took out the ring and showed it to (Putin). And he put it on and he goes, 'I can kill someone with this ring,'" Kraft said, according to the New York Post. 
"I put my hand out and he put it in his pocket, and three KGB guys got around him and walked out."
In the quotes used by the Post, Kraft did not specifically say that Putin stole the ring; the paper characterized his remarks that way in the headline and story. 
Kraft did say, however, that he had wanted the ring back. 
"I had an emotional tie to the ring. It has my name on it."
The Patriots' owner said he then received a call from the White House at the time telling him it would be in the best interest of U.S.-Russian relations to claim it was a gift to Putin, the Post reported. 
Kraft said Thursday he played along.
A few days after the 2005 incident, amid confusion as to whether the ring was a present or was kept by mistake, Kraft issued a statement saying it was a gift.
That's the way Putin sees it, the president's spokesman said Sunday.
"What Mr. Kraft is saying now is weird," Dmitry Peskov said. 
"I was standing 20 centimeters away from him and Mr. Putin and saw and heard how Mr. Kraft gave this ring as a gift."
The 4.94-carat ring is in the Kremlin's library, where all official state gifts are kept, he said. 
It is worth more than $25,000, according to multiple reports from 2005.
A Kraft spokesman said Sunday the story is a humorous anecdote that Kraft "retells for laughs."
"He loves that the ring is at the Kremlin and, as he stated back in 2005, he continues to have great respect for Russia and the leadership of President Putin," said Stacey James, a spokesman for The Kraft Group.
"An added benefit from the attention this story gathered eight years ago was the creation of some Patriots fan clubs in Russia," he said.
There is some solace for Kraft, as he also received rings for the Patriots' Super Bowl victories in the 2001 and 2003 seasons.
Super Bowl rings can fetch much more when they are auctioned, depending on who wore them. 
The 1991 Super Bowl ring of Hall of Famer Lawrence Taylor sold last year at auction for more than $230,000. 
There were rumors Charlie Sheen bought the ring, but the actor denied it.
At least one ring has been used to raise money for charity. 
In 2008, former Patriots defensive player Je'Rod Cherry raffled off one of his three rings to raise $150,000 for several children's charities.


Russia issues warning on Syria as G8 gathers for summit
The G8 summit is set to be dominated by the conflict in Syria
World leaders have gathered in Northern Ireland for a G8 summit set to be dominated by the conflict in Syria.
UK PM David Cameron said he hoped G8 nations would focus on finding "common ground" on the issue of bringing peace.
But Moscow, Syria's key ally, opposes US plans to arm the rebels and on Monday its foreign ministry said Russia would not allow a no-fly zone to be imposed over Syria.
The two-day summit is also expected to focus on global economic issues.
Other nations joining the UK, US and Russia for the 39th Summit of the Group of Eight (G8) in Lough Erne, County Fermanagh, are Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan.
Mr Cameron has now officially welcomed all the leaders to Lough Erne.
Ahead of the first session of talks, Mr Cameron, US President Barack Obama and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso held a press conference to announce the start of negotiations for an EU-US free trade deal.
Mr Cameron said a successful agreement would have a greater impact than all other world trade deals put together.
"This is a once-in-a-generation prize and we are determined to seize it," said Mr Cameron.
Syria disagreements
The G8 comes days after the US said it was prepared to arm opposition forces in Syria saying it had evidence that President Assad's forces had used chemical weapons on a "small scale".
Mr Cameron, who backed the recent lifting of EU arms sanctions against the rebels, said on Monday that no decision had yet been made on whether the UK would do the same.
But he told reporters ahead of the summit that it was right the West should be "helping, assisting and advising" the opposition.
"We shouldn't accept what President Assad wants us to accept which is the only alternative to him is extremist terrorism. That isn't the case. That is insulting to the millions of Syrians who want a peaceful democratic future for their country and it's their side that we should be on," he said.
UK Foreign Secretary William Hague told BBC Radio 4's Today programme that there were no "palatable options", admitting there were extremists on both sides of the conflict. 
But he said the opposition leaders he had met were "sincere... about their commitment to a future democracy in Syria."
After meeting Mr Cameron on Sunday, Russian President Vladimir Putin said "blood is on the hands" of both the Syrian government and the rebels in the crisis and that Russia was not breaching any laws by supplying arms to the "legitimate government of Syria".
And in an apparent reference to a video that emerged last month which appeared to show a Syrian rebel eating the heart of a dead soldier, he said the behaviour of some rebels, who "eat the organs" of their enemies, went against the "humanitarian and cultural values" of Europe.
On Monday, Russian foreign ministry spokesman Alexander Lukashevich said of the possibility of a no-fly zone over Syria: "I think we fundamentally would not allow this scenario."
Earlier, Mr Cameron said it was "no secret" that President Putin disagreed with the US and the EU on Syria but said he hoped they would focus on their common aims at the G8 - to deal with the humanitarian crisis and to establish a peace conference.
Two years of civil war in Syria has left an estimated 93,000 people dead.
Tax evasion
President Obama, on his first visit to Northern Ireland, delivered a public address at the Waterfront Hall centre in Belfast before travelling on to Lough Erne.
He then held 15 minutes of talks with Mr Cameron as the pair travelled to meet children at a school in Enniskillen.
Mr Obama will also meet Mr Putin face-to-face over the course of the two-day meeting.
Mr Obama and Mr Cameron have met Italian PM Enrico Letta, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Francois Hollande to discuss the EU-US free trade deal.
Mr Cameron said the deal "could add as much as £100bn ($157bn; 117bn euros) to the EU economy, £80bn to the US economy and as much as £85bn to the rest of the world".
Mr Obama said the deal was a priority for the US and he hoped that it would create an economic alliance as strong as the diplomatic and security alliances the two sides enjoyed.
The formal talks on Monday are scheduled to cover the global economy.
On Tuesday, Mr Cameron will hope to make progress on tax transparency after agreeing a deal on the issue over the weekend with British overseas territories and Crown dependencies.
He has made no secret of his desire to tackle tax evasion and aggressive tax avoidance.
Tuesday will also cover counter-terrorism issues.
As the event started allegations were made in The Guardian newspaper on Monday, that Britain had spied on delegates who attended two G20 meetings in London in 2009.
The newspaper reported that documents, leaked by the ex-CIA whistleblower Edward Snowden, showed that British intelligence monitored the computers of foreign politicians and officials.
British spies are accused of setting up internet cafes to read delegates' email traffic and penetrating the security on officials' BlackBerrys to monitor email messages and phone calls. 
Targets are alleged to have included the Turkish finance minister and possibly 15 others in his party.
The Turkish foreign ministry said the allegations, if true, would "constitute a scandal".
Observers say the revelations could cause tensions among delegates attending the G8, but Mr Cameron refused to be drawn, saying he "never comments on security and intelligence issues".
Security in Northern Ireland is tight, as ever for the G8, which has been a magnet for protests in the past.
A four-mile (6.5km) long, 3m-high metal fence surrounds the golf resort where the summit takes place.
Some 8,000 police officers are being deployed for the summit.
Police are expecting an anti-G8 march in Enniskillen in County Fermanagh on Monday, with about 2,000 demonstrators.


Fashion icons Dolce, Gabbana convicted in Italy of tax crime
(CNN) -- Fashion luminaries Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana were sentenced to prison in Italy Wednesday for failing to pay 40.4 million euros in taxes to the Italian government, their lawyer and a prosecutor said.
"This time it was not the case like the invoice for car repair," prosecutor Laura Pedio said of the crime for which the fashion duo was convicted. 
"This time it's serious, complicated, sophisticated tax fraud crime."
Both men were sentenced to one year and eight months in prison and, in addition to what they owe in taxes, told to pay a fine of 500,000 euros. 
Their lawyer, Massimo Dinoia, vowed that the defense plans to appeal the convictions as well as the related fines and sentences.
"Dolce and Gabbana will not go to jail now or ever," Dinoia said.
Four others associated with the upscale Dolce & Gabbana brand -- including Domenico's brother Alfonso Dolce and company tax consultant Luciano Patelli -- also face prison time, though Dinoia and Pedio did not know the length of all their sentences. 
While the decision was announced Wednesday morning in a Milan court, authorities did not immediately release details to the media or public.
According to Pedio, investigators found that between 2004 and 2007 Dolce and Gabbana failed to tell Italian authorities about an offshoot company they'd set up in Luxembourg, costing Italy millions of euros in taxes.
"I'm very satisfied with the sentence," the prosecutor said. 
"It was a very elaborate (use of an offshore company) that appeared legal, but was illegal."
The fashion magnates' defense team said this wasn't a sweeping verdict. 
In a statement, the lawyers said the court found Dolce and Gabbana innocent "of the accusation of having unfaithfully declared their earnings," even as the two men were convicted on a "taxes declaration omission."
It's not clear how the court ruling will impact the storied Dolce & Gabbana company, if at all.
The two stylists debuted their brand in an October 1985 show in Milan. 
Since then, they have exploded to become one of the world's most recognizable and desired fashion companies, with an array of products and stores from Azerbaijan to Qatar to Singapore to the United States and many places in between.


Dolce and Gabbana sentenced to jail for tax evasion
Italian fashion designers Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana have been sentenced to jail in Italy for one year and eight months for tax evasion.
They were accused of hiding millions of euros from Italian tax authorities.
The pair, whose customers have included Madonna, Kate Moss and Kylie Minogue, were not at the trial, deny the charges and have appealed.
Dolce and Gabbana have not commented on their sentences, which have been suspended pending their appeal.
The investigation by the Italian authorities began around six years ago as part of a government plan to crack down on tax avoidance.
At the hearing on Wednesday, the judge ruled that the designers moved their brand to a Luxembourg-based holding company Gado - a play on their two surnames - in 2004.
He said they had done this to avoid declaring taxes on royalties of around 1 billion euros (£833m; $1.3bn).
Prosecutors alleged they sold the business for well below actual market value.
They were initially cleared of the charges at a previous trial in April 2011 but Italy's highest court overturned that ruling, ordering that the case should be sent back.


Turkish demonstrators plan next moves
Istanbul (CNN) -- Still smarting from their ouster Saturday from Istanbul's Taksim Square, demonstrators planned to meet at 9 p.m. Wednesday in 11 neighborhoods to discuss how to proceed.
Using social media to organize, hundreds of youths met Tuesday in at least seven forums to carry out such planning.
A total of 883 people have been detained under protest-related charges since May 31, said Emre Cokgezen, a member of the Istanbul Bar Association's crisis desk, which was created to handle detention issues related to the protests.
Though most of those have been released, 71 remained in custody facing terrorism charges, 20 facing organized crime charges and 28 facing other charges, he said.
Nine other people have been missing for more than 10 days, he said.
Defense lawyers were to meet Wednesday with the prosecution at the Istanbul Adalet Sarayi, one of Europe's largest courthouses, to receive prosecution files.
In the lobby of the courthouse, about 15 people -- including a judge -- continued Wednesday the "standing man" protest initiated Monday by a lone man in Taksim Square.
For more than five hours, Erdem Gunduz had stared toward a portrait of Kemal Ataturk, the founder of the modern Turkish state, whose likeness adorns the side of the Ataturk Cultural Center in the square. 
By Tuesday, hundreds of other protesters were emulating him.
Despite the presence of police in the square, a few "standing man" protesters continued their vigils Wednesday as life about them continued as normal. 
The people taking pictures of the protesters outnumbered the protesters themselves.
The scene here contrasted with the mayhem in the square Saturday, when police broke up anti-government protests with tear gas and water cannons.
Turkey has been wracked by more than two weeks of protests against the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
The unrest began in Istanbul in late May, when a small group of people turned out to protest government plans to bulldoze Gezi Park, one of the city's last green spaces, and replace it with a shopping mall housed inside a replica of 19th-century Ottoman barracks.
Protesters said the plans represented a creeping infringement on their rights in a secular society.
Soon after the demonstrations began, security forces cracked down. 
Instead of ending the activity, however, the crackdown prompted more people to come out, many calling for political reforms.
The unrest also brought political risks for Erdogan, a populist and democratically elected politician serving his third term in office.
Speaking Tuesday to a parliamentary group meeting of his Justice and Development (AK) Party, Erdogan said he had no intention of restricting anyone's democratic rights. 
"If you want to make a protest, do it, do it, but do it within the framework of law," he said.
He accused the international media of misrepresenting events in Turkey.
"Vandalism (footage) was twisted and displayed as if it was an innocent environmental protest," he said. 
"International media reported on this in a manner to deceive those who are not acting with them to their side."
Erdogan reiterated that the government will abandon its plans to build in Gezi Park if the people of Istanbul vote against them.
Erdogan plans to muster a show of support this weekend in the Turkish heartland, where he has a strong base.
Rallies are to be held on behalf of the Justice and Development Party in Kayseri on Friday, in Samsun on Saturday and in Erzurum on Sunday.
U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay on Tuesday expressed concern about the tactics used by security forces against demonstrators.
"I am particularly concerned about allegations of excessive use of force by police against peaceful groups of protesters as this may have resulted in serious damage to health," she said in a statement issued from Geneva.
But Erdogan defended the police approach.
"The police forces have passed the democracy test," he said Tuesday, according to the semiofficial Anadolu Agency news service.
He described the use of tear gas on protesters as an "incontestable right of police" and the demonstrations as "an unprincipled, immoderate movement that is based on lies and deception," Anadolu reported.
While the protests are unlikely to threaten the rule of Erdogan, who is credited with overseeing a decade of economic growth, they are raising questions about what critics say is an increasingly authoritarian style of governing.


Turkish man stages silent protest in Taksim Square
A Turkish man has staged an eight-hour silent vigil on Istanbul's Taksim Square - the scene of violent clashes between police and anti-government protesters.
Erdem Gunduz stood silently facing the Ataturk Cultural Centre which was draped in Turkish flags and a portrait of the country's founder Mustafa Kemal Ataturk.
He told BBC World Service that he wanted to take a stand against police stopping demonstrations near the square.
Hundreds of others have followed his lead, staging similar protests in cities across Turkey.



Eurotunnel accused of overcharging train companies 
Passengers travelling through the Channel Tunnel are being overcharged, according to the European Commission.
The EC said both passengers and freight services are paying over the odds for using the track through the tunnel, which is operated by Eurotunnel.
Eurotunnel is a private company owned by the investors who paid for and now run the Channel Tunnel.
Eurotunnel said its charges are "transparent and not excessive."
The EC has formally called on the British and French governments to look into the pricing structure and to comply with European Union rules against excessive track access charges.
The European Commission said the high prices Eurotunnel charges the train companies get passed onto passengers.
The EC also said that freight companies are put off using the Channel Tunnel because of the "excessive" charges, preferring to send their goods by road, which causes traffic congestion and pollution.
The Commission claims 43% of the Channel Tunnel's capacity is currently unused.
Vice-President of the European Commission Siim Kallas said: "'The Channel Tunnel is not being used to its full capacity because of these excessive charges.
"As a result, more freight is being carried on lorries instead of by rail, freight operators and their customers are being over-charged, and passenger are paying over the odds for their tickets. The current regime is also stifling growth in the rail sector," he added.
In a statement, Eurotunnel said that it has "always sought the development of cross-Channel traffic and concentrates significant resources on this goal".
'Weak regulator'
The European Commission also said that the regulator which oversees the tunnel, the Intergovernmental Commission (IGC) is weak and far from independent.
The Commission said the IGC "does not have the power to adopt decisions on its own initiative without a complaint".
The EC added that the IGC is not an independent body, because it is made up of representatives appointed by the UK and French governments.
In a statement, the European Commission said: "Lack of independence of a rail regulator can lead to failure by the regulator to address complaints by operators in an independent manner or to adopt decisions to force compliance with EU rules and thus can lead to distortions of competition".
Reacting to the assertions of the Commission, a UK Department for Transport spokesman said that "it is not accepted that the UK has failed to implement the relevant EU rules regarding the Channel Tunnel or that the IGC is not independent".



GM even safer than conventional food, says environment secretary
GM crops are probably safer than conventional plants according to the Environment Secretary.
Making the strongest call yet for the adoption of the technology, Mr Paterson told the BBC that that GM has significant benefits for farmers, consumers and the environment.
He said the next generation of GM crops offers the "most wonderful opportunities to improve human health."
But green groups say this new push is dangerous and misguided.
The environment secretary has never made a secret of his support for GM technology. 
Speaking to the BBC ahead of a major speech in favour of GM, Mr Paterson said it was being adopted by the rest of the world and the UK and Europe risked being left behind.
He dismissed criticisms that GM could pose problems to human health.
"The use of more precise technology and the greater regulatory scrutiny probably make GMOs even safer than than conventional plants and food," he said.
"The EU chief scientist Anne Glover has said it pretty bluntly - there is no substantiated case of any adverse impact on human health on animal health or on environmental health."
Persuade the public
Mr Paterson said that GM offers benefits not just to UK consumers and farmers but holds a great deal of promise especially in the developing world. 
He cited the example of Golden Rice, a GM variety that has been modified to have increased levels of vitamin A.
This helps prevent blindness in young children especially in deprived environments. 
But even though the rice was developed in 1999, it has yet to be grown commercially.
"Every attempt to deploy has been thwarted and in that time 7 million children have gone blind or died," said Mr Paterson.
He will argue that the government, along with industry and the scientific community "owe a duty to the British public to reassure them GM is a safe, proven and beneficial innovation".
The European Union has been deadlocked on GM for a number of years. 
Only two crops have been approved for commercial growing - another seven are awaiting the green light.
But Mr Paterson is expected to say in his speech that member states who are open to the safe use of GM crops should not be prevented from moving forward with the technology.
But critics have been quick to condemn Mr Paterson's view that GM is a "safe, proven and beneficial innovation".
Soil Association policy director Peter Melchett said that GM would make it harder, not easier, to feed the world.
"The British Government constantly claim that GM crops are just one tool in the toolbox for the future of farming. In fact GM is the cuckoo in the nest. It drives out and destroys the systems that international scientists agree we need to feed the world."
"We need farming that helps poorer African and Asian farmers produce food, not farming that helps Bayer, Syngenta and Monsanto produce profits," he added.
Mr Paterson's stance was backed by a number of scientists, including Professor Dale Sanders, the Director of the John Innes Centre in Norwich. 
He wants to see a greater focus on solving global problems such as malnutrition rather than arguments about one technology or another.
"Evaluation of potential scientific solutions to agriculture should be evidence-based," he said.
"The overwhelming global conclusion regarding the deployment of GM technologies in the field is that the risks associated with the technologies are infinitesimally small."
Mr Paterson's speech comes in the same week that the National Farmers Union warned that the UK's wheat crop could be 30% smaller than last year because of extreme weather.
The environment secretary will say that GM could "combat the damaging effects of unpredictable weather and disease on crops".
The technology has "the potential to reduce fertiliser and chemical use, improve the efficiency of agricultural production and reduce post-harvest losses. If we use cultivated land more efficiently, we could free up space for biodiversity, nature and wilderness."
At present there are no commercial GM crops grown in the UK although cattle, sheep and pigs are often fed on imported GM. 
There is only one active GM trial of wheat that has been modified to deter aphids. 


Obama seeks further cuts to U.S., Russia nuclear arsenals
The president wants to move beyond the reductions set forth in the New START pact. 
Congressional Republicans and Putin voice their opposition.
BERLIN — Despite an uphill battle both in Moscow and in Congress, President Obama vowed Wednesday to try to shrink the number of U.S. and Russian nuclear weapons, making the case for what he called a "move beyond Cold War nuclear postures" to enhance global security.
In a foreign policy speech here, Obama said he would seek to cut by up to one-third the number of deployed strategic U.S. nuclear warheads beyond levels set by the New START treaty — if Russia would agree to the same, an unlikely prospect given the mounting tension with Moscow. 
He said both countries could cut their arsenals without undermining deterrence or capabilities.
Obama also said that after a "comprehensive review," he had directed the Defense Department to strengthen its nonnuclear capabilities, to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in deterring nonnuclear attacks and in contingency planning and security strategy.
The 2010 New START, or Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, calls for the United States and Russia each to cut their nuclear arsenals to 1,550 warheads by 2018, the lowest level since the 1950s. 
Obama's proposal would reduce that to about 1,000. 
He also called for "bold reductions" in U.S. and Russian tactical weapons in Europe.
"Peace with justice means pursuing the security of a world without nuclear weapons, no matter how distant that dream may be," he told about 4,500 people, many waving German and U.S. flags, on the east side of the iconic Brandenburg Gate in blistering summer heat.
The reaction from Republican lawmakers in Washington and Russian President Vladimir Putin indicated how distant that goal remains.
Putin, who openly disagreed with Obama over Syria this week at an economic summit in Northern Ireland, offered no support for his nuclear proposal Wednesday.
"We cannot allow the balance of the strategic deterrence system to be broken, or the effectiveness of our nuclear forces to be diminished," Putin said at a defense industry meeting in St. Petersburg, Russia.
Russia's deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, told the RIA Novosti news agency that Russia could not "indefinitely and bilaterally talk with the United States about cuts and restrictions on nuclear weapons in a situation where a whole number of other countries are expanding their nuclear and missile potentials."
Ryabkov said no discussion on nuclear cuts was possible before an "acceptable solution" was reached on missile defense. 
Russia opposes the U.S.-backed North Atlantic Treaty Organization plan to build a missile defense system in Europe, which Moscow views as a threat to its military deterrence capabilities.
Another obstacle in Obama's path is Russia's desire to retain thousands of battlefield-sized, or so-called tactical, nuclear weapons, which it views as crucial to its defense.
Senate conservatives have made it clear that they would oppose any treaty to cut the nuclear arsenal below New START limits. 
Sen. Kelly Ayotte (R-N.H.), a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, called Obama's proposal "misguided and dangerous."
"A robust and reliable U.S. nuclear arsenal discourages nuclear proliferation and deters nuclear attacks on the United States and our allies," she said. 
"What Obama sees as compromise, Putin sees as weakness."
For Obama, "these are all high hills to climb," said John D. Isaacs, executive director of the Council for a Livable World, an arms control advocacy group in Washington. 
His group is urging Obama to take unilateral steps to reduce U.S. reliance on nuclear weapons.
Obama indicated that his first choice would be nuclear reduction through a treaty. 
But he left open the possibility of a nonbinding reciprocal agreement with the Russians to shrink the stockpile without requiring Senate approval.
Obama's remarks seemed aimed at building his legacy in the White House and at convincing Europeans that he is the same ambitious, globally minded and liberal politician who drew a cheering crowd of 200,000 people onto the streets of Berlin when he visited as a presidential candidate in 2008.
This time, he declared climate change "the global threat of our time" and called for action on poverty and joblessness. 
He also said this could be "the first AIDS-free generation" if citizens pressed their leaders with urgency.
But his attempt at uplift was complicated by his other task: defending administration policies that are unpopular in Europe.
Obama vowed to redouble efforts to close the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and called for "tightly controlling" the drone aircraft program he has embraced for five years to kill suspected terrorists.
He also sought to offer reassurances about newly disclosed U.S. telephone and Internet surveillance programs that have caused particular outrage in Germany, with its grim history of government abuses, insisting that U.S. intelligence operations are "bound by the rule of law."
"They're focused on threats to our security, not the communications of ordinary persons," Obama said. 
"They help confront real dangers, and they keep people safe here in the United States and here in Europe."
In a private meeting before the speech, German Chancellor Angela Merkel pressed Obama on the issue. 
She told reporters later that the programs must strike an "equitable balance" between privacy and security concerns.
Obama spoke in front of a familiar backdrop for presidents eyeing legacy-making moments.
Fifty years ago, President Kennedy declared solidarity with this once-divided city in his "Ich bin ein Berliner" speech in West Berlin. 
In 1987, Ronald Reagan stood at the Brandenburg Gate and called on Soviet leaders to "tear down this wall."


Obama calls for reducing U.S., Russian nukes
(CNN) -- President Barack Obama followed in the footsteps of past U.S. leaders with a speech on Wednesday at Berlin's iconic Brandenburg Gate, where he said he would ask Russia to join the United States in slashing its supply of strategic nuclear warheads.
"We may no longer live in fear of global annihilation, but so long as nuclear weapons exist, we are not truly safe," Obama said in the city that symbolized the East-West divide in the decades after World War II.
"After a comprehensive review, I've determined that we can ensure the security of America and our allies -- and maintain a strong and credible strategic deterrent -- while reducing our deployed strategic nuclear weapons by up to one-third," he said. 
"And I intend to seek negotiated cuts with Russia to move beyond Cold War nuclear postures."
Obama's speech made repeated references to Berlin's post-war history and the resiliency of its people. 
He called on them to manifest the same spirit that helped bring down the Berlin Wall to now take on broader challenges facing the modern world.
"Complacency is not the character of great nations," said the president, who perspired openly despite removing his suit jacket when he started speaking to a sun-drenched crowd. 
"Today's threats are not as stark as they were half-a-century ago. But the struggle for freedom and security and human dignity, that struggle goes on."
Repeating his campaign themes of equal opportunity and freedom for all, Obama said such ideals can provide the prosperity sought by all nations -- especially longtime allies such as the United States and Germany.
"We may enjoy a standard of living that is the envy of the world, but so long as hundreds of millions endure the agony of an empty stomach or the anguish of unemployment, we're not truly prosperous," Obama said. 
"We are more free when all people can pursue their own happiness."
In the city rife with Cold War history, Obama also heralded democratic values that helped end communist control.
"Because millions across this continent now breathe the fresh air of freedom, we can say here in Berlin, here in Europe: Our values won," he said to cheers. 
"Openness won. Tolerance won. And freedom won."
Obama's speech took place almost exactly 50 years after President John F. Kennedy delivered his "Ich bin ein Berliner" -- or "I am a Berliner" -- speech of solidarity with West Berlin near the dividing line with the Soviet-occupied east on the other side of the Berlin Wall.
Berlin is also where President Ronald Reagan delivered a famous line to the Soviet Union in 1987: "Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!"
When Obama referred to Kennedy's speech and repeated the famous phrase, the crowd cheered. 
He also quoted from Kennedy's speech by calling on people to look "to the day of peace with justice, beyond yourselves and ourselves to all mankind."
Taking on another major issue, Obama called for a new global effort to address climate change, citing threats such as "more severe storms, more famine and floods, new waves of refugees, coast lines that vanish, oceans that rise."
"This is the future we must avert," he said to cheers. 
"This is the global threat of our time. And for the sake of future generations, our generation must move toward a global compact to confront a changing climate before it is too late. That is our job. That is our task. We have to get to work."
Analysts said Obama's speech sought to entrench a presidential legacy of leadership on global issues, especially after the lofty expectations in Germany and elsewhere for the candidate who spoke in Berlin five years ago have given way to the realities of the Oval Office.
"It was a president who wanted to kind of put down a stake and say, like JFK, like Ronald Reagan, I share their values as an American president and these are the things I feel like I need to talk to you about today as an American president," said CNN Chief Political Analyst Gloria Borger.
Historian Douglas Brinkley called it a "healing speech," but said "let's not confuse this with Kennedy's very important Cold War talk in Berlin or Ronald Reagan's fighting words about 'tear down this wall.'"
"This was not a moment that's going to be a gold star on history's calendar," Brinkley told CNN.
Beyond New START
Obama's latest proposals on nuclear stockpiles come two years after New START -- an agreement between the United States and Russia -- went into effect. 
New START, which stands for Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty, calls for each country to limit its nuclear warhead arsenal to 1,550 by the year 2018.
If fully implemented, his proposals on Wednesday would reduce both stockpiles by another one-third -- to roughly 1,000 warheads for each country.
"At the same time, we'll work with our NATO allies to seek bold reductions in U.S. and Russian tactical weapons in Europe," he said.
After New START was ratified, Obama ordered a detailed internal analysis of U.S. nuclear needs and what it would take to deter other countries from attacking, the White House said.
Obama has also said the United States will only consider the use of nuclear weapons in extreme circumstances to defend the vital interests of the United States or its allies and partners.
A White House fact sheet released after the speech called Obama's proposals "new guidance that aligns U.S. nuclear policies to the 21st century security environment."
Obama's guidance directed the Pentagon to reduce the role of nuclear weapons in the overall U.S. security strategy, and narrow the focus of nuclear strategy to deterrence, the White House document said.
The proposals drew immediate criticism from the Republican chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, Rep. Howard "Buck" McKeon of California, who said in a statement that Russia already failed to adhere to existing arms-reduction agreements.
"The president must make clear to (Russian) President (Vladimir) Putin that the United States will not allow itself or its allies to be bullied by Russia or to allow that state to ignore its arms control obligations," McKeon's statement said.
Pressuring Iran and North Korea
The United States will continue working to stop the spread of nuclear weapons, with specific pressure on Iran and North Korea, a senior administration official said.
Obama also will participate in the 2014 Nuclear Security Summit in The Hague, Netherlands, the official said. 
The president announced Wednesday in his speech that he will host a Nuclear Security Summit in 2016 to work with other countries in securing nuclear materials and preventing nuclear terrorism.
Wednesday's speech took place amid a festive atmosphere at Brandenburg Gate, where Obama faced the East in contrast to Reagan's appearance when the Berlin Wall still divided the city.
While the crowd was much smaller than the estimated 200,000 who jammed the area in 2008 to hear then Sen. Obama speak, people waved U.S. and German flags and regularly erupted in cheers and applause.
Near the front was Gail Halvorsen, known as the Candy Bomber for being the first to drop candy to kids during the U.S. airlift of 1948-49 that supplied West Berlin following a Soviet blockade.
Obama paid tribute to that moment, noting that the 92-year-old Halvorsen, who he called "the original candy bomber," was present.
"We could not be prouder of him," Obama said as Halvorsen stood and waved. 
The president added: "I hope I look that good, by the way, when I'm 92."


Lourdes holy shrine closed after severe flash floods
Residents of the French town of Lourdes are clearing up after severe flash floods which forced the closure of its holy shrine.
The town's Massabielle cave, where the Virgin Mary is said to have appeared to a local girl, is one of the most famous Catholic pilgrimage sites in the world, attracting nearly six million visitors every year.
The cost of repairing the shrine is expected to run into hundreds of thousands of euros.



Sources: Catherine's baby to be born in same hospital as Prince William
London (CNN) -- Prince William's wife, Catherine, plans to give birth to their first baby in the same hospital wing where her husband was born to Diana, Princess of Wales, almost 31 years ago, sources familiar with the plans said Wednesday.
The first details of the protocol surrounding the announcement of the birth were revealed as the Duchess of Cambridge enters the final weeks of her pregnancy.
The baby -- which, regardless of gender, will be heir to the British throne -- is expected to arrive in mid-July.
According to sources familiar with the plans, the birth will take place in the private Lindo Wing of St. Mary's Hospital in Paddington, west London.
The first indication that the baby is on its way will be the announcement to the media that the Duchess of Cambridge has been admitted to the hospital in the early stages of labor, royal sources told CNN.
The next public announcement is expected to be that of the birth.
It will be made in the form of a formal bulletin, signed by medical staff and rushed in a car with a police escort to Buckingham Palace.
There, the notice will be placed on an easel on the palace forecourt, the royal sources said. 
This will be the first chance for the nation and those watching around the world to find out whether the new baby is a boy or a girl.
William and Catherine don't know the sex of their baby and want to keep the surprise until it's born, the royal sources said. 
William's grandmother Queen Elizabeth II and other members of both families will be told of the birth before the public knows.
The next announcement will be that the Duchess of Cambridge and her baby are to be discharged from the hospital.
People are already laying bets on what the newest member of the royal family will be named.
Alexandra appears to be the favorite for a girl, with George the favored name for a boy, according to UK betting websites. 
Diana, Elizabeth and Victoria are also popular choices with punters.
The baby will be third in line to the throne after Prince Charles and Prince William.
Paternity leave
The royal couple will probably present their baby to the world on the same doorstep where a proud Diana and Prince Charles showed off William in 1982.
It's not yet been disclosed where the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge plan to spend the days and weeks following the birth, the royal sources said.
William, who will turn 31 on Friday, is expected to be given the usual paternity leave of two weeks by the Ministry of Defence, the royal sources said. 
He will then return to his job as a helicopter search and rescue pilot.
The revelation of the birth details may be cause for some anxiety, given the tragedy that followed Catherine's hospitalization late last year for acute morning sickness.
In that instance, a prank call by an Australian radio station to nursing staff at King Edward VII's Hospital, which sparked a media frenzy after details of Catherine's care were revealed, resulted in a nurse's suicide.
"We would appeal to all members of the media for an appropriate degree of sensitivity, dignity and privacy in their reporting," a royal source said.
"With the events of the King Edward Hospital still strong in our memories, we would expect any media covering the Duchess of Cambridge's hospitalization to ensure that the normal functions of the hospital are not impeded by any media presence."
Champagne on ice?
According to the Lindo Wing website, it has been offering private obstetric and neonatal care for mothers and babies since 1937.
The private wing operates alongside the Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, which is part of the National Health Service.
"Over the years, we have gained an international reputation for clinical excellence in both obstetric and neonatal medicine which has made us the choice for thousands of mothers. 
But what really sets us apart is the discreet, traditional, individualised service we provide," the Lindo Wing's online brochure says.
According to the prices listed, a stay in the Lindo Wing doesn't come cheap by comparison with National Health Service care, which is free at the point of delivery.
However, the mother can stay in a room with its own bath or private suite, with a range of facilities and services offered. 
Among them is "a comprehensive wine list should you wish to enjoy a glass of champagne and toast your baby's arrival."
The care package for the first 24 hours with a normal delivery starts at £4,965 ($7,777), with the price increasing for a larger room or suite, or if a forceps delivery or caesarean section is needed. 
An additional night's stay costs £900 ($1,400) or more on top of that price.


Obama returns to Berlin, no longer a 'superstar'
President Obama will give his first speech in Berlin since his rousing address as a candidate in 2008. 
This time, he comes amid lowered expectations, trying to mend transatlantic rifts.
WASHINGTON — Five years ago, when Americans had not yet made up their minds on their choice for president, Europe had. 
More than 200,000 people crowded the streets of Berlin — a favorite backdrop for U.S. politicians reaching for history — to hear then-candidate Barack Obama promise to turn the page on the unpopular policies of George W. Bush.
"Germany meets the superstar," the news magazine Der Spiegel proclaimed on its cover.
As he heads to Europe on Sunday for a visit that will culminate with a sequel to that Berlin speech three days later, Obama has been demoted to mere president.
For many Europeans, Obama's tenure has been a lesson in lowering expectations. 
Although he maintains approval ratings on the continent any politician would envy, confidence in his leadership and support for his international agenda have slipped since those heady early days.
"He was the subject of enormous projections that he was never, ever going to be able to live up to. He was the non-Bush. He was the intimation of the America without Bush that people could love again," said Constanze Stelzenmueller, a transatlantic relations expert at the German Marshall Fund of the United States in Berlin.
"He's become somewhat demystified."
Obama's failure to close the Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, detention center, his escalation of drone warfare and small steps on global warming are among the reasons the sheen has dulled, polling shows. 
Another may have been added with the recent revelations that Obama has expanded Bush-era surveillance of phone calls and email. 
Several European officials have demanded more information. 
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has said she will raise the issue with Obama when the two meet privately.
There are other rifts between the United States and European leaders that the president will try to mend during his visit, which begins Monday with the annual meeting of the Group of 8 industrialized nations, held this year in Northern Ireland.
Obama will explain his decision to arm the rebels in the bloody civil war in Syria, a move hailed by leaders in Britain and France, while others fear being pulled into another war in the Middle East. 
And Obama is likely to renew his unsuccessful efforts to persuade Merkel to ease up on her demands for austerity measures in other European countries, which he views as hampering the continent's economic recovery. 
On Friday, he called Merkel and the leaders of Britain, France and Italy to talk about Syria and Libya, which faces threats from radical Islamists.
This year, his economic offensive comes with a full-scale appeal to his high-wattage popularity — and to history. 
In Berlin, Obama has chosen a city that became a potent reminder of American ties to Europe. 
His speech will mark 50 years since President Kennedy, at Schoeneberg Town Hall in West Berlin, affirmed his solidarity with Germans in the face of communism with his declaration, "Ich bin ein Berliner."
The president is to speak at Brandenburg Gate, an imposing columned monument once cut off from the West by the Berlin Wall. 
In 1987, President Reagan stood with the gate behind him and demanded that Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev "tear down this wall."
Once a symbol of Cold War division, the edifice is now a coveted setting for U.S. presidents as a testament to the triumph of democracy. 
President Clinton spoke there in 1994 after the wall had been torn down and declared: "Berlin ist frei."
Obama's own moment at the gate has long been envisioned by his foreign policy advisors. 
His campaign scouted the site in 2008, but chose another venue after Merkel suggested she was uncomfortable with electioneering at the historic monument.
The incident was not forgotten. 
In 2011, Merkel needled Obama for not returning to Berlin as president, joking: "I can promise that the Brandenburg Gate will still be there."
Obama will speak on the east side of the gate, where a plaza will limit the crowd size and the potential for unfavorable comparisons to his mega-rally.
The audience awaiting him Wednesday will undoubtedly be more skeptical. 
In European countries polled by Pew Research last year, 63% of those surveyed approved of Obama's international policies, down from 78% in 2009. 
In Germany, 52% said they had a favorable view of the United States, down from 64% in 2009 — but up from 34% in Bush's last year in office.
"Those numbers are still pretty good compared to other parts of the world. Really, what it's all about is he didn't meet expectations," said Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew Global Attitudes Project.
Still, an overwhelming 87% of Germans said they have "a lot" or "some" confidence in Obama.
In his unabashedly lofty speech five years ago, Obama asked the massive crowd to envision a world without nuclear weapons, a planet Earth healed, without racial or sectarian divisions.
"These are the walls we must tear down," Obama said. 
"This is the moment to stand as one."
In Berlin this week, Obama probably will return to similar themes, referring back to the united front that ended the Cold War and imaging a more harmonious world.
"I think his message is very much going to be that just because the threat is not immediately apparent with a wall and barbed wire, it doesn't mean that we don't have work to do together," said Ben Rhodes, a top White House foreign policy aide.
But Obama's words may also reflect the toned-down ambitions he has after a term as president. 
Stelzenmueller noted that Germans — and Europeans as a whole — will expect Obama to address some difficult issues: Syria, trade and U.S. surveillance of foreign phone calls and email.
"Despite the fact that we're close, we have legitimate disagreements that we need to thrash out or negotiate," she said. 
"It's difficult to make glamorous speeches about that kind of thing."


50 years after JFK's 'Ich bin ein Berliner'
(CNN) -- The White House has announced that on Wednesday, at the invitation of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, President Obama will speak in Berlin at the city's landmark Brandenburg Gate. 
The president's subject will be the transatlantic alliance and the enduring bonds between the United States and Germany.
Berlin comes as a welcome relief for Obama. 
It gives him a chance to put aside for the moment the difficulties he is having in the Middle East and with the National Security Agency spying scandal. 
The president's Berlin appearance also reminds us that he is following in historic footsteps.
June 26 marks the 50th anniversary of President John F. Kennedy's famous "Ich bin ein Berliner" speech, praising the citizens of West Berlin for their refusal to be intimidated by the massive East German-built wall that since 1961 had divided their city.
The reaction of the crowd listening to Kennedy address them in front of West Berlin's City Hall was so overwhelming that, on the plane leaving Germany, he remarked to his aide, Ted Sorensen, who had written most of his speech, "We'll never have another day like this one as long as we live."
Kennedy is always given style points for his Berlin speech because of its easy-to-remember rhetoric. 
But the speech is worth recalling today because it amounted to such a profound pivot away from the prevailing nuclear logic of the Cold War. 
In Berlin, Kennedy recast how he believed the Cold War should be waged in the future in a way that made his thinking clear to the European and American public.
For Kennedy, the chance to speak near the Berlin Wall two years after it was built was a major opportunity to redefine his foreign policy leadership.
In his 1961 Vienna summit meeting with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev, Kennedy had gotten off to a rocky start. 
In 1962, during the Cuban missile crisis, he had regained his footing. 
He had resisted calls by some of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for a massive airstrike against Cuba and made sure he and the Soviets avoided backing each other into a nuclear exchange.
In Berlin, Kennedy showed that he had learned from both confrontations. 
Instead of treating the Cold War as simply a battle over which side had the most military power and the will to use it, he framed it as a battle that also included the fate of captive peoples and their right to self-determination.
It was an emphasis that would bear fruit in the Prague spring of 1968, in Poland's Solidarity movement and finally in Ronald Reagan's 1987 Brandenburg Gate speech with its memorable line, "Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!"
Kennedy's rhetoric in Berlin was equal to his good intentions. 
"Two thousand years ago, the proudest boast was 'civis Romanus sum' ("I am a Roman citizen"). Today, in the world of freedom the proudest boast is 'Ich bin ein Berliner,' " Kennedy declared. 
His words paid tribute to those Germans trapped in a divided Berlin, but his overriding point was, "Freedom is indivisible, and when one man is enslaved, all are not free."
Kennedy was doing the opposite of saber-rattling. 
He was updating the ideas behind the Declaration of Independence so they spoke directly to contemporary Europe. 
When his audience heard Kennedy's words, they were reminded of the Berlin Airlift of 1948, in which America responded to the Soviet ground blockade of West Berlin with an airlift that brought West Berliners the food and supplies they needed without U.S. troops firing a shot.
Earlier in June 1963, Kennedy had established the groundwork for his Berlin speech with an address he gave at American University in Washington. 
There, he spoke about establishing the conditions for an "attainable peace" that was neither a Pax Americana nor a peace of the grave.
The Soviet Union, Kennedy cautioned, needed to abandon its distorted view of an America ready to unleash a preventative nuclear war, but at the same time America needed to make sure that it did not fall into the same trap as the Soviets by seeing Russia through a distorted ideological lens.
Ever the practical politician, Kennedy conceded that he had no "magic formula" for bringing about such a change in the world's two superpowers, but it was possible, he concluded, to debate the Cold War without each side making new threats. 
"We can seek a relaxation of tensions without relaxing our guard," he insisted.
Today, the American University speech is widely praised, but at the time, the speech was seen primarily as a policy statement. 
The public reaction to the speech was minimal. 
One day later, the American University proposals were replaced as a front-page story by the highly charged racial confrontation between the Kennedy administration and Alabama Gov. George Wallace over the admission of two African-American students to the formerly all-white University of Alabama.
Berlin was a different story in terms of its popular impact and a sign that Kennedy was becoming increasingly sophisticated in using his personal popularity to promote policy change.
In Berlin, the still-young president took advantage of being on the global stage to make it easier for friend and foe alike to see him as a leader eager to steer America and the world away from nuclear confrontation.
His efforts were not wasted. 
Two months after his Berlin speech, the United States, Great Britain and the Soviet Union signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the first such agreement since atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.


Why Taliban would talk as U.S. withdrawal looms
(CNN) -- As is so often the case in Afghanistan, turmoil and confusion have clouded this week's announcement of peace talks involving the United States and the Taliban in Doha, Qatar.
CNN senior international correspondent Nic Robertson explains what's happening, and why.
What are we talking about?
The Taliban have opened an office in Qatar with an eye toward beginning talks there with Afghan and U.S. officials to end the fighting in Afghanistan. U.S. officials are expected to meet Thursday with Taliban representatives in Doha, but Afghanistan said Wednesday it won't participate.
What's gone wrong?
Afghan President Hamid Karzai is upset about how the Taliban portrayed themselves in opening their Qatar office, and he feels there's a rush to talks. 
He wants to be in control the peace process, and he isn't.
So he's pulled his delegation to the Doha talks and backed out of direct discussions with the United States about what happens after 2014, when NATO withdraws from Afghanistan.
Taliban talks announced
Who's saying what?
Karzai says there are "contradictions between acts and statements of the U.S. in regard to the peace process." 
He says that the Taliban are emphasizing a continuation of the fighting and that "foreign powers" -- read Pakistan -- "are behind the opening of the Taliban office" in Qatar.
The Taliban, which angered Afghan officials by flying their flag and provocatively calling themselves the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, say they're "fighting to bring an end to the occupation" by NATO forces.
Is the peace process over?
It's unlikely -- everyone has something to gain from a successful negotiation. 
The United States would get a dignified exit for most of its forces and an agreement on a long-term presence in Afghanistan. 
Karzai would get the legacy he craves as a peacemaker, and the Taliban would get a say in how the country is run.
President Barack Obama said we should expect "bumps in the road" and warned that this would be "a difficult process." 
And this is not the first time Karzai has stalled things.
But this is not a good start. 
Compromise seems to be in short supply.
What about the killing of 4 U.S. soldiers by the Taliban?
It is worrying that this came hours after the Taliban statement Tuesday. 
Is it coincidence or backlash? Some Taliban field commanders are unhappy with their representatives in Qatar, and behind the scenes, those close to the Taliban fear an uptick in violence near Kabul.
There's a risk that hard-liners will undermine leaders they don't trust in these talks. 
That's true in most peace negotiations. 
Some think representatives in Qatar will do Pakistan's bidding and want out of the fight now. 
Others may fight long after the majority agrees to peace.
Is there a grand bargain to be had?
International representatives close to the process in the past have told me not to rule it out. 
A bargain, where the Taliban accept U.S. bases in Afghanistan beyond the 2014 pullout date and where they agree not to attack them, is possible. 
The same people also say don't hold your breath, this has been a long time coming.
What are the demands?
The Taliban must renounce al Qaeda. 
In the past, the Taliban have demanded that all foreign troops leave the country and have asked for specific percentages of representation in the Afghan political and military structures. 
They also want their prisoners released from U.S.-controlled detention.
Taliban officials have said in the past that theirs is a national struggle and that al Qaeda has an international agenda. 
However, they would take support where they could get it. 
The demand to renounce al Qaeda has been made to the Taliban since their first tentative "talks" in Mecca, Saudi Arabia, in 2008.
Which Taliban are we talking about?
The Taliban of Mullah Omar, the Afghan leader or the Emir of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan before September 2001. 
His right-hand man, Tayyab Agha, heads the Taliban mission in Qatar. 
Other principal Taliban and Afghan opposition factions include the Haqqani faction, the TTP or Pakistani Mehsud faction and the Hekmatyar faction in the North East.
Those close to Mullah Omar's Taliban say the vast majority of Taliban support him.
International representatives close to the process say that while that may be true, powerful groups like the Haqqanis could continue an insurgency even if Mullah Omar makes peace with Kabul.
Why would the Taliban talk now?
The civil war that the Taliban had all but won in 2001 has gone into remission with the presence of international forces. 
If the Taliban were to fight for the whole country again, they may not do so well.
The civil war bubbles beneath the surface, and should it resurface, the former northern warlords who have profited from the U.S. presence would make a Taliban fight for supremacy much harder. 
In short, they may get a better deal at the table than on the battlefield.
Why has it taken so much time to get talks going?
Karzai on several occasions felt bypassed by backdoor U.S. conversations with the Taliban in Qatar. 
He reportedly blocked progress. 
The Taliban also walked out on talks when Taliban prisoners at the U.S. base in Guantanamo Bay were not released as they had expected.
Where is Mullah Omar, and why's that important?
He is widely believed to be in Pakistan, unable to move freely without Pakistan's approval. 
That's what his supporters believe, although Pakistan has denied it. 
Pakistan wants a say in Afghanistan's future. 
If Afghanistan drifted toward Pakistan's archenemy India, its sphere of influence would be upset.
What influence will Pakistan have on the talks?
Agha, Mullah Omar's representative, could not have established an office in Qatar and be in a position to talk to Afghans and Americans without Pakistan's permission. 
That's the understanding of some in the Taliban, at least.
Karzai and U.S. officials have long accused Pakistan's intelligence agency, the ISI, of supporting the Taliban in Afghanistan. 
The ISI denies that.
What hiccups can we expect?
Karzai says the next talks must be in Afghanistan. 
That is unlikely to sit well with Pakistan.
But just to get to this point has been very difficult. 
For the talks to work, all sides will need to be committed.


Karzai suspends talks with U.S. over Taliban agreement
The Afghan president on Wednesday suspended talks with the United States on a new security deal to protest the way his government was being left out of initial peace negotiations with the Taliban meant to find a way to end the nearly 12-year war.
The move by Hamid Karzai raises tensions significantly and could derail the peace process even before it has begun.
In a terse statement from his office, Karzai said negotiations with the U.S. on what American and coalition security forces will remain in the country after 2014 have been put on hold. 
The deal was expected to define the future of American troops here and also pave way for billions in aid to the Afghan economy.
Karzai's statement followed an announcement Tuesday by the U.S. and the Taliban that they would pursue bilateral talks in Qatar before the Afghan government was brought in.
“In view of the contradiction between acts and the statements made by the United States of America in regard to the peace process, the Afghan government suspended the negotiations, currently underway in Kabul between Afghan and U.S. delegations on the bilateral security agreement,” Karzai's statement said.
His spokesman was not immediately reachable for questions, and the U.S. Embassy in Kabul said it had no immediate comment.
Though the Taliban have dismissed Karzai as an American puppet for years, they indicated Tuesday when opening a new political office in Doha, Qatar, that they would be willing to talk with the Afghan leader.
But both the American side and the Taliban said they would first meet together before any talks with the Afghanistan government.
In another incident highlighting the fragile situation in Afghanistan, only hours after announcing they would hold talks with the U.S., the Taliban claimed responsibility Wednesday for an attack on the Bagram Air Base in which four American troops were killed.
Taliban spokesman Zabiullah Mujahid said the insurgents fired two rockets into the base outside the Afghan capital, Kabul, late on Tuesday. 
American officials confirmed the base had come under attack by indirect fire — likely a mortar or rocket — and that four U.S. troops were killed.
Also Tuesday, five Afghan police officers were killed at a security outpost in Helmand province by apparent Taliban infiltrators — the latest in a string of so-called “insider attacks” that have shaken the confidence of the nascent Afghan security forces.
The opening of a Taliban political office in Doha with the intention of starting peace talks was a reversal of months of failed efforts to start negotiations while Taliban militants intensified a campaign targeting urban centers and government installations across Afghanistan.
President Barack Obama cautioned that the peace talks with the Taliban would be neither quick nor easy but that their opening a political office in Doha was an “important first step toward reconciliation” between the Islamic militants and the government of Afghanistan.
In setting up the office, the Taliban said they were willing to use all legal means to end what they called the occupation of Afghanistan — but did not say they would immediately stop fighting.
American officials said the U.S. and Taliban representatives will hold bilateral meetings in the coming days. 
Karzai's High Peace Council had been expected to follow up with its own talks with the Taliban a few days later but it was now not clear whether that would happen.
The Taliban announcement followed a milestone handover in Afghanistan earlier Tuesday as Afghan forces formally took the lead from the U.S.-led NATO coalition for security nationwide. 
It marked a turning point for American and NATO military forces, which will now move entirely into a supporting role.
The handover paves the way for the departure of the majority of coalition forces — currently numbering about 100,000 troops from 48 countries, including 66,000 Americans — within 18 months.
The NATO-led force is to be cut in half by the end of the year, and by the end of 2014 all combat troops are to leave and be replaced — contingent on Afghan governmental approval — by a smaller force that would be on hand for training and advising.
It was not immediately clear how long Karzai planned to suspend the negotiations on the agreement.
The U.S. has not yet said how many troops will remain in Afghanistan, but it is thought that it would be a force made up of about 9,000 Americans and 6,000 allies.
Six years ago, Afghan security forces numbered fewer than 40,000, and have grown to about 352,000 today. 
But questions remain if they are good enough to fight alone.
In the Helmand attack late Tuesday, local official Mohammad Fahim Mosazai said five police officers who had only been on the local force for three months were killed, apparently by five of their fellow officers. 
He blamed the killings on Taliban infiltrators, and said the suspects escaped with the victims' weapons.
In a similar attack in Helmand a week ago, six policemen were found shot dead at their checkpoint, and there have been several other such incidents in the past year, including officers poisoned while eating.
Taliban insurgents have warned they would infiltrate Afghan security forces to carry out insider attacks.
Overnight in the eastern province of Nangrahar, police ambushed Taliban fighters outside a village in the Surkh Rod district, killing four and capturing two militants. 
Two police officers were wounded in the fighting, said deputy provincial police chief Masoon Khan Hashimi.


Official: US, Afghan Taliban talks to be held 'in next few days' 
Kabul, Afghanistan (CNN) -- Peace talks between the U.S. and the Taliban over the war in Afghanistan will likely be held "in the next few days," a senior U.S. administration official told CNN on Wednesday.
The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, did not offer up a timeline for the discussions.
News the meeting was moving forward followed a tumultuous day that saw questions raised about the peace process after an angry Afghan President Hamid Karzai said he was pulling out of the peace talks with the Taliban and canceling security talks with the United States.
Karzai was angered over reports the Taliban appeared to be offering its new office in Doha, Qatar, up as an alternative government, going so far as to put up a sign proclaiming it the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan -- the name the Taliban used during their rule.
In a statement released by Karzai's office, the president said "foreign powers" were behind Tuesday's opening of the Taliban office.
Karzai appeared to renew earlier claims that the Taliban and Western officials want to destabilize Afghanistan.
Despite Karzai's decisions to pull back, the United States continues "close coordination" with the Afghan government on peace and security talks, U.S. State Department spokeswoman Jenn Psaki said Wednesday.
Karzai's office said Taliban rhetoric about continuing to take the fight to Afghan and foreign fighters even as the group pursues a political solution was "completely in contradiction to the assurance that was given to Afghanistan by the United States of America."
He used similar justification for suspending security negotiations with the United States over the presence of foreign troops in Afghanistan past the scheduled pullout next year.
In March, Karzai appeared to accuse the United States and the Taliban of collusion, saying violent attacks by the group "show that the Taliban are serving the foreigners and are not against them."
He later walked the remarks back, saying they were misinterpreted.
Speaking Wednesday in Berlin, U.S. President Barack Obama said he wasn't surprised by Karzai's response.
"We had anticipated that at the outset there were going to be some areas of friction, to put it mildly, in getting this thing off the ground," Obama said.
But he said that he believes Karzai remains committed to political reconciliation, and that he needs to be.
"We don't expect that it will be easy," Obama told reporters at a news conference with German Chancellor Angela Merkel. 
"But we do think ultimately we're going to need to see Afghans talking to Afghans about how they can move forward and end the cycle of violence so they can start actually building their country."
The Taliban opened the Doha office with a promise to renounce international terrorism and commit to peace negotiations, conditions the United States had set before it would support establishing the office as part of peace talks.
But a Taliban spokesman also said the group would continue its military campaign, a promise soon followed by the group's claim of responsibility for the death of four U.S. troops.
Psaki said the name of the Taliban office came as a surprise to U.S. officials and that Qatari officials took the name off the office door Wednesday, replacing it with the more neutral "Political Office of the Afghan Taliban."
Karzai's office said Wednesday that his administration wants peace with the Taliban.
"But the messages of continuation of fighting which were sent out during the opening of the Taliban office in Qatar are completely in contradiction with the peace-wanting spirit of the government of Afghanistan," Karzai said.
He said the High Peace Council would not take part in the talks with the Taliban in Doha "until the process is completely left to Afghans."
Karzai earlier Wednesday suspended talks with the United States over maintaining a troop presence in Afghanistan to help train Afghan forces past the scheduled 2014 pullout date for Western troops.
The agreement could provide the basis for any future NATO role in Afghanistan.
Karzai's decision to suspend those talks came a day after NATO-led troops transferred security responsibility to Afghan forces.
The Afghan government suspended the talks "in view of the contradiction between acts and the statements made by the United States of America in regard to the Peace Process," it said in a statement.


Afghan government to shun U.S. talks with Taliban
(Reuters) - Revived Afghan peace talks hit their first roadblock on Wednesday, a day after they were announced, as Afghan President Hamid Karzai said his government would not join U.S. talks with the Taliban and would halt negotiations with Washington on a post-2014 troop pact.
The United States and the Taliban had announced on Tuesday that officials from both sides will meet in Doha, the capital of Qatar, in coming days, in a step forward for a stuttering peace process after 12 years of bloody and costly war between U.S.-led forces and the insurgents.
But the precise timing of the negotiations was uncertain on Wednesday as U.S. officials worked furiously to keep the nascent peace talks on track.
Officials of Karzai's government, angered by the opening of a Taliban political office in Doha on Tuesday, said the United States had violated assurances it would not give official status to the insurgents.
"As long as the peace process is not Afghan-led, the High Peace Council will not participate in the talks in Qatar," Karzai said in a statement, referring to a body he set up in 2010 to seek a negotiated peace with the Taliban.
Karzai's objections appeared to focus on the way the Taliban unveiled the office in Doha, which suggested the Islamic movement would use it as an official embassy or even a base for a government-in-exile.
When Taliban envoys appeared at the building on Tuesday, it was decorated with a banner referring to the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, the name the Taliban used during its 1996-2001 rule of the country.
Karzai said the office's opening showed the United States had failed to honor promises made to the Afghan state about its role.
"The U.S. officials told us the office will be used to move peace talks forward, but not to give them an identity," an Afghan official said. 
"The Taliban's flag and the banner of the Islamic Emirate was something we did not expect."
U.S. and Afghan officials said U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry spoke with Karzai on Tuesday night and again on Wednesday morning in an effort to defuse the controversy.
Kerry told the Afghan leader that "the government of Qatar has taken steps today to ensure that the political office is in compliance with the conditions established by the government of Qatar for its operations," State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki said.
Qatar "has had the sign with the incorrect name in front of the door taken down," Psaki said.
U.S. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel, answering questions after an address on Wednesday at the University of Nebraska, said the involvement of Karzai's government would be essential for future talks.
Without specifying a time frame, Hagel added: "Any kind of a next set of meetings that would involve the United States - certainly we're a long way from any negotiations - would require the Taliban to agree to certain things. That can't be done, won't be done, without President Karzai and the people of Afghanistan."
Meanwhile, U.S.-Taliban talks that U.S. officials had suggested would take place in Doha on Thursday appeared to be delayed by at least a few days.
A senior U.S. official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the initial meeting was likely to be held in the "next few days," but would not be more specific.
The dispute over the Taliban office after months of behind-the-scenes diplomacy to restart the peace talks underscored what U.S. officials say is a void of trust between Karzai and the Taliban, who have been waging an insurgency to overthrow his government and oust foreign troops.
Fighting continued in the war-ravaged nation. 
Four U.S. soldiers were killed in a rocket attack on the heavily fortified Bagram base near Kabul late on Tuesday, international military officials said.
TROOP TALKS SUSPENDED
Karzai's office also said it was suspending the talks on a post-2014 security pact with the United States.
Negotiations on the Bilateral Security Agreement began this year and, if completed, will set out how many U.S. bases and soldiers will remain in Afghanistan once NATO ends combat operations by December 2014.
"In view of the contradiction between acts and the statements made by the United States of America in regard to the peace process, the Afghan government suspended the negotiations," Karzai's office said in a statement.
"The suspension of the talks will continue until there is clarity from the United States," the Afghan official added.
The announcement of the diplomatic moves on Tuesday had raised hopes that Karzai's government and the Taliban might enter their first-ever direct negotiations on Afghanistan's future, with Washington acting as a broker and Pakistan as a major outside player.
On Tuesday, Karzai had said his government would also send a team to Qatar but added the talks should quickly be moved to Afghanistan.
The Taliban has until now refused talks with Kabul, calling Karzai and his government puppets of the West. 
But a senior Afghan official said earlier the Taliban were now willing to consider talks with the government.
It remained to be seen how long Karzai's boycott of the peace process - of which he is said to be deeply skeptical - will last. 
He has at times staked out stark positions publicly, only to reverse himself later.
A Taliban spokesman in Qatar on Wednesday confirmed the insurgency movement would attend a meeting with U.S. officials, but gave no time for the talks. 
The spokesman, Mohammed Naeem, told Reuters that no Afghan government officials would be at that meeting.
Underlining the importance of the process to the United States, the State Department said Kerry would travel to Doha for meetings with senior Qatari officials on Friday and Saturday. 
But U.S. officials said he would not meet with Taliban representatives.
SIGN OF OPTIMISM
The Taliban has said it wants a political solution that would bring about a just government and end foreign occupation of Afghanistan.
The first signs of optimism in peace efforts for many months come as the U.S.-led war effort reaches a critical juncture. 
The NATO command in Kabul on Tuesday handed over lead security responsibility to Afghan government forces across the country.
U.S. officials said that in the talks in Doha, the United States would stick to its insistence that the Taliban break ties with al Qaeda, end violence, and accept the Afghan constitution, including protection for women and minorities.
Asked if the Taliban would renounce al Qaeda, which Washington considers a terrorist organization, Naeem, the Taliban spokesman, said there was no clear definition of terrorism.
"Once we define what terrorism is, for the Islamic emirate of Afghanistan (the Taliban), (we) will be able to say what is acceptable and what is not acceptable," he said.
The Taliban is expected to demand the return of former senior commanders now detained at the U.S. military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, a move opposed by many in the U.S. Congress, as well as the departure of all foreign troops.
The United States wants the return of the only known U.S. prisoner of war from the conflict, Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl, who is believed to be held by the Taliban.

James Gandolfini, star of The Sopranos, dies in Italy
Actor James Gandolfini, who played Tony Soprano in the acclaimed US mafia drama The Sopranos, has died in Rome after reportedly suffering a suspected heart attack. 
He was 51.
Gandolfini was in Italy to attend the 59th Taormina Film Festival in Sicily and was due to attend an event with the director of the festival this weekend, according to entertainement news website TMZ.
HBO spokesman Mara Mikialian confirmed his death. 
In a statement, HBO called the actor a great talent and a gentle and loving person.
"He was a genius," said Sopranos creator David Chase. 
"Anyone who saw him even in the smallest of his performances knows that. He is one of the greatest actors of this or any time. A great deal of that genius resided in those sad eyes." 
Gandolfini's managers Mark Armstrong and Nancy Sanders said: "Our hearts are shattered and we will miss him deeply. He and his family were part of our family for many years and we are all grieving."
"I had the greatest sparring partner in the world, I had Muhammad Ali," said co-star Lorraine Bracco, who, as Tony's psychiatrist Dr Melfi in The Sopranos, went one-on-one with Gandolfini in their therapy scenes.
Gandolfini rose to fame in the 1993 film True Romance but became a household name thanks to his lead role in the groundbreaking The Sopranos that aired from 1999 to 2007. 
His performance was indelible and career-making, but he refused to be stereotyped in other roles as the bulky mobster who was a therapy patient, family man and cold-blooded killer.
The programme ran for six seasons and, during that time, Gandolfini won three Emmys for his portrayal of the troubled mob boss. 
Since The Sopranos ended its run in 2007, Gandolfini has appeared in a number of big-screen roles, including the espionage thriller Zero Dark Thirty and the comedy The Incredible Burt Wonderstone.
Gandolfini also shared a Broadway stage in 2009 with Jeff Daniels, Hope Davis and Marcia Gay Harden in a celebrated production of "God of Carnage," where he earned a Tony Award nomination for best actor. 
He also was in "On the Waterfront" with David Morse. 
In a December 2012 interview with The Associated Press, Gandolfini said he gravitated to acting as a release, a way to get rid of anger. 
"I don't know what exactly I was angry about," he said.
"I try to avoid certain things and certain kinds of violence at this point," he said. 
"I'm getting older, too. I don't want to be beating people up as much. I don't want to be beating women up and those kinds of things that much anymore."
At the time of his death, Gandolfini had been working on an upcoming new HBO series titled Criminal Justice. 

Police make arrest in Alps killings
(CNN) -- Police in England arrested a 54-year-old man Monday in connection with the execution-style killing of a family in the French Alps last year, they said.
Police in the county of Surrey, outside of London, did not name the man.
Two children survived the shootings of their mother, father and grandmother in September 2012.
Saad al-Hilli, his wife, Ikbal al-Hilli, and his mother-in-law were shot dead, along with a French cyclist.
Zainab al-Hilli, 7 at the time, was shot and beaten but was rescued by a British cyclist who came upon the scene.
Her sister Zeena, 4 at the time, hid under her mother's body in the family car and survived physically unharmed.

EU accession and rights: voices from Zagreb
After tough negotiations that lasted many years, Croatia is finally joining the club of European Union nations, becoming its 28th member. 
In terms of justice and citizens rights, the country has had to undergo major reforms to become aligned with European standards. 
Right On reporter Seamus Kearney caught up with four people from different sectors in Zagreb to find out whether Croatia will be ready to extend the new European legal protections and rights to its citizens. 
“Firstly, I have to emphasise that the process of joining the EU was not open enough; the public wasn’t participating enough. So we now actually have the problem where the public is not informed well enough about the EU process, especially not about EU laws."
“We had the situation in Croatia where the majority of laws were changing very fast to become more in accordance with European laws, of course. But they didn’t hold a lot of public debates and so on because the process was so fast and also pretty tight."
“That’s why we created a platform of civil society organisations – Platform 112 – to focus on some aspects of joining the EU and to encourage the government to be more open in this process, especially on Chapter 23 (judiciary and fundamental rights). We created this platform at the end of the joining process, so Chapter 23 was still open, so we focused more about the rule of law and so on."
“The public is still not informed enough. The government should definitely have more measures to open up this process, to inform the public better, so that ordinary citizens would be able to participate better, especially to use more EU rights and EU laws. Of course that is not only the role of government. It’s also a role of all segments of society and all sectors, but of course the government should be open for that."
“For instance, now we have this joining party, but that party is still government oriented, and they are organising it and so on. So we would like this process to be more participatory."
“It’s very important to create active citizenship, and that’s also of course very important for the general public, for ordinary people to be able to use all of the advantages and all of the rights from EU membership.” 
“July the 1st is certainly going to be a very big day. However, it is the end of a very long process, and in that process many steps have been made. However, it is still far from enough and there are many more things to be done, especially in the area of implementation."
“We changed a lot of laws, we made a lot of changes on the surface. However, especially in some sensitive areas like the judiciary and human rights, things changed not as fast as people would have liked, and therefore we will now face the biggest challenge of all, to start to work from our own impetus, from our own ambition to change things."
“In fact, in the process until now, the main driver was the wish to please the European Commission, to show that we have undertaken the reforms that were requested from Croatia from the outset. And in some areas, especially in the judiciary, it led to the situation where things had to move faster than objectively possible, so many things are now done only half way, and therefore the biggest challenge of all will be to continue with the reforms."
“Because on the other hand, there will also be significant opposition to the continuation of reforms. Many people are tired of reforms, many people in institutions, both in the judiciary and around it, think that the reforms have gone too far, and they would like to reverse them back.”
“The role of Croatian judges during the time of Croatian accession to the European Union was significant, since they contributed to the legislative alignment with their work and the interpretation of applicable regulations in the spirit of European law."
“The basic assumption of that important assignment was the good understanding of EU law. But before the launch of the Bologna Process at Croatian faculties of law, courses in EU law were elective. Therefore most judges never attended EU law classes during their studies. That deficiency had to be compensated with the systematic education of judges, judicial officials and public prosecutors in the field of EU law."
“This lifelong education of judges and public prosecutors is the responsibility of the Judicial Academy, which was founded in 2004 as an institute within the Ministry of Justice. In 2010 the Judicial Academy became an independent and autonomous public institution."
“Most of the activities of the Judicial Academy are related to professional training in EU law. Besides the lifelong education of judges and judicial officials, training in European law is expanded in the initial professional training of trainees in judicial bodies and those attending the State School for Judicial Officials."
“The training programmes are conducted through various activities and in several ways – in the form of workshops, seminars, round tables and conferences, and sometimes professional training is conducted in the form of study visits."
“Since the establishment of the Judicial Academy, and since the beginning of professional training in EU law, over 300 different activities were organised – the exact number is 337 activities, with over 6000 trainees participating, sometimes in several activities. These activities were organised by the Judicial Academy or in collaboration with different EU programmes such as CARDS 2001, CARDS 2003, PHARE 2005, IPA 2008 and IPA 2009."
“On July the 1st, 2013, us judges in the Republic of Croatia are becoming European judges. That means new tasks and the obligation to apply European law in the same way that our European colleagues do. That also means a good knowledge of European court practice and our obligation to follow that practice, to implement new directives and to study European law, which is a developing system."
“Croatia’s entry into an association of European states such as the European Union represents a turning point that will be manifested in the field of law implementation i.e. the obligation on the Republic of Croatia to implement European law."
“Croatia already did a tremendous amount of work in this area through the professional training of judges and public prosecutors, as well as in the field of aligning Croatian law with European law. However, we are aware of the work that lies ahead, and Croatian judges are ready to accept the new missions and challenges before them in joining the European Union."
“Croatia is a member of the Council of Europe, it ratified the European Convention on Human Rights and it has access to the European Court of Human Rights – and that raised the bar in terms of legal protection for Croatian citizens. Our experience from the accession negotiations tells us about the benefits in the field of legal protection through the European judicature, which is mandatory in Croatia."
“The appliance of European law represents additional legal protection and the rule of law. Certainly, the initiative to strengthen the legal protection will grow further, so the rights of Croatian citizens will be additionally protected in the European Union.” 
“Training courses held by the Croatian Bar Association were necessary and indescribably important, mainly because of our entry into the European Union and because European law and European court practice will be absolutely necessary in the everyday lives of our citizens, and during the process of reaching verdicts for us lawyers."
“There will be some significant changes. Our clients will definitely seek an extension of their rights, and they will definitely try to apply them in regard to the State, mainly because the Constitution guarantees the use of European law and European court practice in Croatian courts."
“Therefore, our clients will go to European courts to ask for the protection of their, some might say, ‘expanded’ rights, which will be ensured after the accession to the European Union. We will most definitely apply European court practice in our everyday practice."
“Citizens will be able to see and get to know this European practice online. Once they get to know European practice, citizens will compare it to their everyday situations and they will recognise the same events and situations that are current in their own legal case. They will ask us to apply this court practice in their own case, which might be of vital importance to them in order to win the case or to get the best out of it."
“For the last three years, maybe even more than the last three years, during the accession negotiations, we have changed our legislation. We have changed the Constitution, so that it guarantees to each citizen that European law will be applied during every court procedure and during every decision of the court."
“We already aligned most of our legislation with EU law, primarily because of the European Union Directive. We find, and we will probably continue to find, some mistakes in our legislation, but these mistakes will be handled promptly. Such mistakes can be found in our everyday practice, court decisions, appeals etc., but we will try to ameliorate our legislation in the foreseeable future. But I must say that we are definitely ready to join the European Union, because our legislation is almost fully aligned with European legislation.”

Croatia: hey, but I’m an EU citizen now!
July 1, 2013, is the date of Croatia’s accession to the European Union. 
The membership brings with it new legal protection and rights. 
But how prepared is the country to make full use of them?
Reforms linked to justice were among changes seen as crucial before Croatia was allowed to become the 28th member of the European Union.
Laws had to be brought into line with EU standards, and for those who help people fight for their rights on the ground it is a big learning curve.
A major project for Croatian and European officials has been the training of judges, public prosecutors, lawyers and other legal professionals in all aspects of EU law.
We met a young lawyer in Zagreb who has taken part in the seminars, and who expects clients to quickly claim their new rights.
Damjan Krivic, who works at the firm Gugić & Kovačić, told Euronews: “Once they get to know European practice, citizens will compare this to their everyday situations, and they will recognise the same events and circumstances that are current in their own legal cases.
“They will ask us to apply this court practice in their own cases, and this might be of vital importance to them in order to win the case or get the best out of it.”
Damjan says while mistakes linked to the reforms have and will continue to be spotted in everyday legal practice, he is confident they can be quickly ironed out.
But what about the enforcement of legislation? Right On met a judge who has also been involved in training.
Neri Radas at the Zagreb County Court says local judges are becoming European judges, and there is now a duty to abide by EU law.
“Croatia has already done a tremendous amount of work in this area through the professional training of judges and public prosecutors, as well as in the field of aligning Croatian law with European law,” said Judge Radas. 
“However, we are aware of the work that lies ahead, and Croatian judges are ready to accept the new missions and challenges before them in joining the European Union.”
Rights organisations say if Croatians are to benefit fully from their new rights as EU citizens, those in the judiciary must maintain their efforts to become totally familiar with the new legal standards.
Euronews’ Seamus Kearney reported: “But it’s not just the legal profession that has to know the details of European law. Citizens also have to be made aware of their rights and how to use them. And that will be a challenge.”
Not everyone in Croatia supported EU membership; 66 per cent said “yes” in a referendum last year. 
While civil society tries to engage with the public on the issues, authorities struggle to spark interest.
Campaigners say reform came quickly, with not enough public participation. 
But now, raising awareness about the impact is crucial.
Martina Horvat from the “GONG” civil society organisation told Euronews: “The public is still not informed enough. So the government should definitely have more measures to open (up) this process, to inform the public better, so that ordinary citizens would be able to participate better, especially to use more EU rights and EU laws.
“Of course, that is not only the role of government, that is also a role of all segments of society … and all sectors, but of course the government should be open (to) that.”
The government maintains it is doing all it can to make the transition to EU membership as smooth and as fair as possible.
But some experts warn that many people are tired of reforms after a tough and long accession process, and dealing with resistance to the changes will be difficult.
They say there is a lot of work to be done, that some reforms are not yet complete, and there are some opponents who will even try to have them reversed.
Alan Uzelac, a law professor at the University of Zagreb, told Right On: “It is the end of a very long process, and in that process many steps have been made. 
However, it is still far from enough, and there are many more things to be done, especially in the area of implementation.
“In the process until now, the main driver was the wish to please the European Commission, to show that we have undertaken the reforms that were requested from Croatia from the outset. And in some areas, especially in the judiciary, it led to the situation where things had to move faster than objectively possible. So many things are now done only half way, and therefore the biggest challenge of all will be to continue with the reforms.”
For now though Croatians are taking the time to work out exactly what the accession will mean in their daily lives, having the blue and the yellow stars of the European Union alongside their national colours.

Danish driver Simonsen killed in Le Mans endurance race
Danish driver Allan Simonsen has died after crashing his car during the Le Mans endurance race in France, the organisers say.
They say the 34-year-old spun off after about 10 minutes of the race in his Aston Martin and hit the safety barriers at the Tertre Rouge bend.
He was taken to the medical centre at the premises but later died of his injuries, the organisers said.
It is believed to be the first death in the 24-hour annual event since 1997.
In a statement on Saturday, the Automobile Club de l'Ouest said: "In a serious condition, Allan Simonsen was transferred immediately to the Circuit Medical Centre where he died soon after due to his injuries."
The organisers expressed their "deepest condolences to the family and those close to Allan Simonsen".
The cause of the crash in western France is being investigated.
Simonsen was participating for the seventh time in the race.
After the crash, the race was stopped for about an hour to repair the barriers. 
Two IndyCar drivers tweeted their response to the death.
Helio Castroneves said: "Very sad to know about the fatal accident of Allan Simonsen on Le Mans today. Praying for him and (his) family.''
Tony Kanaan tweeted: "Such a tragic news on the passing of @AllanSimonsen. Sad day in motorsports again. Thoughts and prayers are with his family."
Simonsen's death is believed to be the first in the race since 1986, when Austrian Jo Gartner died after hitting safety barriers head-on at 260km/h (160mph).
In 1997, French driver Sebastien Enjolras was killed during a pre-qualifying session after his car overturned and burst into flames.

Turkey's PM Erdogan and opponents hold mass rallies
Turkish activists have held a mass protest in Istanbul, hours after Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan rallied his own supporters in a seaside resort.
Riot police used water cannon to disperse thousands gathered in Istanbul's Taksim Square.
Mr Erdogan told about 15,000 of his supporters that the protests were led by an international conspiracy.
Protests had eased since last Saturday, when police cleared Istanbul's Gezi Park, the focal point of unrest.
'One prayer'
A small protest over plans to redevelop the park began in May.
It exploded into nationwide anti-government unrest after the police used what activists said were heavy-handed tactics.
Mr Erdogan, who has become a hate figure for the protesters, initially appeared to want to placate his opponents, but later hardened his rhetoric.
On Saturday he told thousands of his supporters in the Black Sea city of Samsun how the protesters insulted Islam.
"Let them go into mosques in their shoes, let them drink alcohol in our mosques, let them raise their hand to our headscarved girls," he said.
"One prayer from our people is enough to frustrate their plans."
He also suggested an international conspiracy with financial interests that he termed the "interest-rate lobby" was behind the protests, though he did not elaborate.
'Just the beginning'
In Taksim Square, thousands had gathered to once again call for Mr Erdogan's resignation.
They chanted slogans such as "Dictator Tayyip" and: "This is just the beginning."
But riot police pushed the crowd out of the square, and deployed water cannon to remove stragglers.
TV images showed protesters putting up little resistance, and there appeared to be little violence.
By nightfall, hundreds of protesters continued to mill around on the edges of Taksim Square, with riot police occupying the central area.
The protesters argue that Mr Erdogan, who has been in power for a decade, has become increasingly authoritarian.
Many accuse him of pursuing an Islamist agenda, threatening Turkey's secular political tradition.
However, Mr Erdogan flags up Turkey's impressive economic performance since he became leader, and the large majorities he has won in three elections.
Mr Erdogan has also eradicated the coup culture that plagued Turkish politics, though his critics say he has silenced dissent in the process.

Kindertransport 'an exceptional act of rescue'
The Kindertransport, also known as the Refugee Children Movement or RCM, rescued thousands of people from Nazi Germany and elsewhere in the lead up to WWII.
Some of the 10,000 children, mostly Jews, whose lives may well have been saved when they were given foster homes held a reunion on Sunday to mark the 75th anniversary of the mission.
Because of the age of those concerned, it is likely to be the last big reunion of its kind.
The Today Programme's Justin Webb asked two of the people rescued through Kindertransport about their experience.
Liane Segal was 8 when she came from to the UK from Vienna: "The journey was very long and very lonely. I was a shy and quiet child, and no-one spoke to my throughout the journey. It was a little frightening."
Herman Hirschberger, was 11 when he came to the UK from Karlsruhe, in West Germany. 
He describes leaving his home town: "We said goodbye to our parents, who said they would see us for a happy reunion in a few weeks time. But that's the last time we ever saw them. They were murdered when the Holocaust began seriously, in 1942. They were murdered and gassed at Auschwitz."
"I think the survival was due to an exceptional act of rescue which was Kindertransport which is to the credit of the British government at the time as well as the people who organised it," he added. 

Gandolfini funeral set for Thursday in NY
(CNN) -- The funeral service for "Sopranos" actor James Gandolfini will be held Thursday in Manhattan, a family friend told CNN on Sunday.
Gandolfini, who was on a working vacation in Rome, died Wednesday. 
An autopsy determined his death was the result of a heart attack, according to Michael Kobold, the family friend.
The actor's remains are scheduled to leave Rome on Monday and arrive in the United States the same evening, Kobold said. 
The service will be held at 10 a.m. Thursday at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine in Manhattan.
"On behalf of the Gandolfini family, I would like to thank the Italian authorities for all of the assistance they have rendered in expediting the formalities necessary to repatriate James Gandolfini's remains to the United States," Kobold said.
"We are fully aware that this process usually takes seven days and we are extremely grateful for their efficiency in dealing with this matter. We sincerely thank you."
The 51-year-old actor arrived in Rome with his son, Michael Gandolfini, a day before he died.
"Jim was happy, he was healthy, he was doing really fine," Kobold said. 
"He was on vacation with his son. He has an 8-month-old daughter. Everything was going great. I just spoke to him on Father's Day."
The same day Gandolfini died, he had visited the Vatican and dined with his son, the family said.
After he returned to his room, his son alerted hotel staff that he was not answering knocks on the bathroom door.
Hotel staff broke down the door to get to him and called an ambulance, said Tiziana Rocca, head of a film festival the actor was planning to attend.
Gandolfini was in Italy to receive an award at the Taormina Film Fest in the Sicilian town of Taormina.
Instead of the award ceremony, the festival paid tribute to Gandolfini's lifetime achievements.
The actor shot to fame on the HBO drama "The Sopranos." 
In the widely successful series, he played Tony Soprano, a tough New Jersey crime boss. 
He also appeared in various movies, including "Zero Dark Thirty" and "Killing Them Softly."

Ankara mayor's BBC spy claims spark hashtag war
ISTANBUL, Turkey (CNN) -- Twitter has been the scene of a bizarre Turkish hashtag war between the mayor of Ankara and, well, a lot of other social networkers.
The drama began Sunday when Ibrahim Melih Gokcek, the man who has been mayor of Turkey's capital for more than a decade, accused a reporter from the BBC's Turkish service of being a foreign agent.
"Who is @selingirit? BBC's reporter in Turkey," Gokcek wrote in a series of English-language tweets.
"Led by England, they are trying to collapse our economy via agents hired, both nationally and internationally. They are dreaming for Turkey to be the 'Sick man of Europe' once again. Here is a concrete proof."
The BBC issued a statement Monday expressing concern about what it described as threats issued by Turkish officials against a BBC correspondent.
Gokcek is an elected official from the Justice and Development Party, or AKP, which is led by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. 
Since an unprecedented explosion of street protests against Erdogan erupted more than three weeks ago, the prime minister and his deputies have accused demonstrators of being terrorists and vandals organized by an alleged shadowy foreign conspiracy Erdogan has labeled "the interest lobby."
Gokcek appeared determined to prove this Sunday via Twitter.
Shortly after accusing Girit of being a spy, he announced the creation of the Turkish hashtag #INGILTEREADINAAJANLIKYAPMASELINGIRIT, which translates roughly to "Don't be a spy in the name of England Selin Girit."
Then, the mayor of Ankara launched a campaign to make the hashtag one of Twitter's worldwide trends.
For the next several hours, he cheered on his followers as the accusation gained online traction with messages like "Keep going Turkiye. Our Hash Tag is ranked 2th. Must place to number 1. This will be our answer to BBC."
Within hours, the mayor's Twitter campaign appeared to have backfired.
Online opponents began mobilizing their own hashtag in response to the mayor of Ankara.
They began retweeting the hashtag #provokatormelihgokçek (Melih Gokcek is a provocateur).
By Sunday night in Turkey, #provokatormelihgokcek had replaced the mayor's hashtag attacking Girit on Twitter's list of world-wide trends.
Gokcek responded by threatening anyone in the world who retweeted the provocateur hashtag with legal action.
"My lawyer is going to sue everyone one by one who tweets #ProvokatorMelihGokcek No one can get away with anything because Turkey is a country of law," the mayor of Ankara announced on Twitter Sunday night.
As of 10am in Istanbul Monday, the #provokatormelihgokcek hashtag was ranked as the second most popular worldwide trend on Twitter.
The BBC issued a statement expressing concern about what it called "the continued campaign of the Turkish authorities to discredit the BBC and intimidate its journalists."
"A large number of threatening messages have been sent to one of our reporters, who was named and attacked on social media by the Mayor of Ankara," wrote Peter Horrocks, Global News Director of the BBC.
Horrocks maintained that BBC reporters were committed to providing "impartial and independent journalism." 
He called on the Turkish government to use "proper channels" to make comments and complaints to the organization.
For the last several years, press freedoms organizations have published a number of reports expressing alarm about the Turkish government's record of jailing journalists.
"The government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has waged one of the world's biggest crackdowns on press freedom in recent history," wrote the Committee to Protect Journalists in a 2012 report. 
Reporters Without Borders has labeled Turkey among the world's worst jailers of journalists, since scores of media workers are currently in prison, many of them awaiting trial on terrorism-related charges.

Average pay of top bankers drops 10%
(Financial Times) -- Average pay of top bankers in the US and Europe including JPMorgan's Jamie Dimon and Royal Bank of Scotland's Stephen Hester dropped by a 10th last year after banks bowed to investor and regulatory pressure, Financial Times research shows.
The fall comes after a wave of high-profile shareholder revolts last year and a number of legal scandals and fines that have forced banks' boards on both sides of the Atlantic to rethink executive pay.
The analysis of total pay awarded to the heads of 15 banks, exclusively compiled for the FT by Equilar, a US pay research group, shows that they took home $11.5m on average in 2012, 10 per cent less than in the previous year.
This marked the first pay cut for bank chiefs in three years, a period in which their profit growth and investor payouts have underperformed many other sectors.
Last year's fall in pay coincides with an average drop in net income by more than a fifth across those 15 lenders. 
But it also comes amid a share price recovery in the sector, with all but two of the banks -- BBVA and Credit Suisse -- outperforming the FTSE World index in 2012.
Of the 10 bankers that were in office since the beginning of 2011, only three -- John Stumpf at Wells Fargo, Stuart Gulliver at HSBC and Brady Dougan at Credit Suisse -- enjoyed pay rises.
With a pay package of $19.3m, Mr Stumpf, toppled JPMorgan's Mr Dimon as the best paid bank chief after the latter saw his rewards cut by almost a fifth.
Mr Dimon, who received $18.7m, is likely to drop even further in the 2013 ranking after JPMorgan gave him sharply lower stock awards this year to reflect the "London Whale" trading debacle.
The analysis by Equilar adds up base salaries, cash bonuses and certain other benefits. 
It also includes option and stock awards that were granted in 2012, some of which were to reward performance in previous years.
It shows that performance-based cash and stock awards fell in tandem as regulators and investors clamped down on bonuses.
The reduction comes as chief executive pay across other sectors remained stable, indicating a narrowing of the pay premium that financial services companies built up in the credit-fuelled pre-crisis years. 
Average pay for S&P 500 chief executives serving at least two full years was $11m, a 0.3 per cent decrease according to Equilar.
The decline in bankers' rewards foreshadows a cap on bonuses that will come into effect across the EU next year.
As many investors do not back those rules, experts expect that they will push up base salaries rather then further bringing down overall pay, as intended by lawmakers.
"Such regulation is driving shareholders to align themselves with bank boards [against the new rules]," said Mark Quinn, a partner at the reward practice of Mercer, the consultancy.
HSBC's Mr Gulliver came out as the best-paid UK bank chief in the survey after his pay soared almost a quarter to $12.9m, despite a lower net profit. 
In his first year as chief executive, Barclays' Antony Jenkins ranked last of all top bankers with a $4.1m pay package. 
It comes after he had foregone his bonus amid various scandals at the bank.

Italy ex-PM Berlusconi sex trial's verdict expected
The former Italian prime minister denies the allegations against him
An Italian court is expected to rule whether ex-PM Silvio Berlusconi paid for sex with an underage prostitute and abused his office as prime minister.
Prosecutors at the trial in Milan are demanding a six-year sentence and a lifetime ban from public office.
The 76-year-old media tycoon denies all the allegations. 
Mr Berlusconi, who is already embroiled in several court cases, was given a four-year sentence for tax fraud in October 2012.
He lost an appeal to overturn the conviction last week.
A court convened in Milan on Monday morning, and was expected to deliver its verdict.
The judgement could have major political repercussions for Italy, analysts say.
They say a guilty ruling could weaken current Prime Minister Enrico Letta's coalition government, which depends on the support of Mr Berlusconi's centre-right party, People of Freedom (PdL).
'Favour to Mubarak'
The prosecution in Milan says that women invited to Mr Berlusconi's private residence for so-called "bunga-bunga" party evenings were part of a prostitution system set up for his personal sexual satisfaction.
The allegations focus specifically on his relationship with Moroccan girl Karima El Mahroug, known as "Ruby the Heart Stealer", whom he is accused of paying for sex in 2010. 
She was 17 at the time.
Both she and Mr Berlusconi have denied the allegations.
Ms El Mahroug says she did receive 7,000 euros (£5,900), but it was as a gift after a party.
She also told a separate trial last month that she had lied to investigators when she said she had bathed naked during parties held at the former prime minister's villa at Arcore, north-east of Milan.
However, Prosecutor Ilda Boccassini told the Berlusconi trial during closing arguments last month that the young woman had lied when she denied having had sex with the former prime minister.
She said Ms Mahroug had received more than 4.5m euros (£3.8m) from Mr Berlusconi between October and December 2010.
Mr Berlusconi is also charged with abusing his power of office after calling a police station to press for the release of Ms Mahroug from custody when she was arrested in Milan in a separate petty theft case.
He has acknowledged the phone-call but says it was made as a favour to former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, whose granddaughter he believed Ms Mahroug to be.
He told a TV programme about the "bunga-bunga" broadcast on one of his Mediaset channels that he had "absolutely never had intercourse with Ruby".
Prosecutors, whom Mr Berlusconi accuses of waging a politicised campaign against him, want him to serve a one-year jail term on the charge of paying for sex with an underage prostitute and five years for abuse of office.

'Godfathers of Metal' Black Sabbath return to roots
London (CNN) -- The rock band Black Sabbath have created music history on both sides of the Atlantic with the release of their new album "13." 
The record has provided the band with their first number one album in the U.S. and their first album chart topper in the UK after an unprecedented 43 years.
They have achieved the landmark by returning to their roots. 
It's the band's first album for more than three decades featuring vocalist Ozzy Osbourne along with fellow original band members guitarist Tony Iommi and bass player Geezer Butler. 
They credit producer Rick Rubin with helping them overcome their initial apprehension.
"He was really good for us", says Butler "and suggested we go back to the old spirit of how we used to do things like live in the studio, a jam, live in the studio kind of feel. And that gave us the direction to go in."
"We tried it in 2001" adds Osbourne "and I think unconsciously we knew this was our last chance. 
If we had failed on this attempt people would have said 'ah it's never gonna happen.' 
I think it must be over 30 or 40 years since I listened to the first album because you know you move on and you challenge yourself. 
As I was saying earlier on, it's like asking the Beatles to go back to 'Please Please Me' and they would have gone 'what?'"
That first album was recorded in just two days in the English city of Birmingham in 1969. 
The band's name was inspired by seeing people queuing to see a horror movie at a cinema in the city.
Osbourne recalls: "Black Sabbath was an after-thought cos originally we were a blues jazz band and someone said 'people pay money to see horror movies and get scared, why don't we start writing scary music?'"
Playing scary music produced a legacy that has influenced generations of rock bands and labeled Black Sabbath as godfathers of heavy metal. 
But the band has an uneasy relationship with their musical offspring.
"I have never ever ever been able to attach myself to the word 'heavy metal' -- it has no musical connotations," Osbourne says. 
"If it was heavy rock I could get that but the 70s was kind of like a bluesy thing, the 80s was kind of bubblegum-frosted hair, multicolored clothes and the 90s was kind of grungy. People come up to me and say 'your Sabbath work was a big influence on me.' I could go 'Oh yeah I can see that' but other bands... what part of that is inspired by us? Some of it is just angry people screaming down a microphone!"
The band had to overcome several obstacles to complete the new album. 
Original drummer Bill Ward was replaced by Rage Against the Machine's Brad Wilk on the new album after a contractual dispute. 
And Tony Iommi was diagnosed with cancer.
"If it was me I'd just go "I'm out of here" says Osbourne "but he never complained once, he just kept it to himself, I'd be thinking this is the end if it was me. My wife beat cancer. I didn't know if anyone could beat cancer."
"He was an inspiration to us during the album" adds Butler. 
"Nothing would stand in his way. He just got on with it and through it and I thought if he can do that then I can do that so we persevered with it."
Ozzy Osbourne recently apologized to his band mates and wife Sharon after admitting he'd relapsed into a cycle of drink and drugs. 
But he says he's been sober now for four months and ready to take the album on the road. 
They say the touring experience now is very different to their wildest days.
"It's great" says Osbourne. 
"I don't go to clubs or bars, I stay in my room."
"Do the gig then go to bed!" laughs Butler.
Man had not long since set foot on the moon when Black Sabbath had their first number one album in the UK. 
It took a record-breaking interval of 42 years and eight months to repeat the feat. 
At times it may have felt like the beginning of the end for the band but in the words of one of their album's stand-out tracks it may in fact be merely the "End of the Beginning."
Osbourne ends in reflective mood. 
"Black Sabbath wasn't some band created by a London mogul. We were four guys who had a dream that became bigger than expectations. It's been the best thing that ever happened to me."

Blanco Pro Cycling team to be sponsored by Belkin 
US consumer technology firm Belkin has become the title sponsor of the Blanco Pro men's cycling team, which was formerly sponsored by Rabobank.
The 30-month deal will see them renamed as the Belkin Pro Cycling Team.
The new team will make its debut at this year's Tour De France, which begins in Corsica this weekend.
Rabobank pulled out at the end of 2012, saying it was unconvinced the world of international professional cycling "can make this a clean and fair sport".
The Dutch financial organisation had continued to fund the men's team this year, despite the squad not carrying its name.
The monetary value of the new sponsorship deal has not been revealed.
'Well-established team'
Explaining the deal, Chet Pipkin, Belkin's chief executive, who also founded the firm in 1983, said cycling had "a passionate, tech-savvy fan base that follows the sport closely, which aligns really well with the Belkin brand".
He also said the tie-up with such a "well-established pro cycling team" would enable the firm to introduce itself to millions of potential new customers around the world.
Belkin makes a variety of electronic products, from wireless home networking and entertainment products, to mobile accessories for smartphones and tablets, home automation and energy management tools, as well as USB and cable products.
The Playa Vista, California-based firm - which has 1,500 employees and sales in more than 100 countries - has signed on as title sponsor until the end of 2015, a period which will cover three Tour De France races.
The Belkin team will consist of 29 riders and five nationalities.
Its jersey and clothing, bikes, vehicles, website and social media properties are being updated with the new Belkin Pro Cycling Team logo and colours: black, white and green, and will feature both the Belkin and Linksys logos.
Top ten aim
Richard Plugge, general manager of Belkin Pro Cycling, told the BBC that the sponsorship deal was a great boost for the team, which has won 19 races as far this season.
Looking ahead to the Tour De France he said that the team's goal was to get rider Bauke Mollema as highly placed within the top ten finishers as possible.
He said if Mollama "does a good job and the circumstances are right" then that could potentially be towards the higher end of the top ten.
"We won't be happy with third, if second place appears possible," he added.
On the question of doping in cycling, he said he thought there had been a change in the culture of the sport, and that the team would have a "harsh" and "zero-tolerance" approach to doping or any other misdemeanours.

Deadly bus plunge in Montenegro
The bus veered off the road during a rain storm
A bus has plunged off a bridge over the Moraca river in central Montenegro, killing 16 people and injuring at least 30 others, local officials say.
The bus toppled 40m into a ravine 30km (18 miles) north of the capital Podgorica, reports said.
Officials said there were almost 50 people on board, and all the victims were Romanian nationals.
The cause of the accident - which happened during a rain storm - is now being investigated.
'Huge tragedy'
Montenegro's Interior Minister Rasko Konjevic described the crash as "an extremely serious accident", saying a number of people were "in a life-threatening condition".
The officials say the injured are being treated in hospital in Podgorica.
Most of those on the bus were pensioners who had left Romania on Saturday for a holiday, Romanian media reported.
But a child was said to be among those hurt, believed to have been standing on the bridge at the time of the crash.
Because of the difficult terrain, it took rescuers some time to move all the victims from the ravine.
Romanian ambassador to Montenegro, Mihail Florovici, visited the injured in hospital, describing the incident as a "huge tragedy", the AFP news agency reports.
The narrow winding roads in the mountainous region are notorious for traffic accidents.

Albanian election: Early lead for opposition Socialists 
Votes are being counted after Albania's parliamentary election, with early returns showing the opposition Socialist-led alliance ahead.
Socialist leader Edi Rama and his main rival, Prime Minister Sali Berisha, both claimed victory on Sunday night.
Shots fired near a polling station killed an opposition activist and wounded a candidate for Mr Berisha's Democrats, in the northern town of Lac.
The official election results are not expected before Tuesday.
With about 10% of votes counted in most regions the left-wing alliance called Renaissance was several points ahead on Monday, Reuters news agency reported.
As head of the alliance Mr Rama, the former mayor of the capital Tirana, hopes to break Mr Berisha's domination of Albanian politics since the communist government was ousted in 1991.
The EU said Sunday's election "represents a crucial test for the country's democratic institutions and its progress towards the European Union".
Mr Berisha is seeking a third term, but the campaign was marred by allegations of vote-rigging, fuelling fears of political instability.
A dispute over the country's electoral commission also threatens to leave the result in doubt.
Results 'at risk'
Elections in Albania, one of Europe's poorest countries, have been marred by violence or claims of fraud since the fall of communism. 
After polls closed Mr Berisha told reporters that he was "convinced of our great victory".
However, Mr Rama insisted "the Renaissance has won".
Both politicians promise job creation, economic development and tax reform.
They are also both strongly pro-European, reflecting widespread public support for EU integration.
About 400 international observers and more than 8,000 Albanian monitors were deployed for the polls.
Because of a dispute between the two rival coalitions, the seven-member Central Electoral Commission has only four members. 
The minimum legal requirement is five.
On Saturday, a Western diplomat told AFP news agency that there was now "a great risk the results [of Sunday's polls] would be contested, either by the outgoing coalition or by the opposition".
Sunday's shootout took place near a polling station in Lac.
A police spokesman said an activist from Mr Rama's party, Gjon Gjoni, was killed in an exchange of fire with Mhill Fufi, a candidate for the governing party.
Mr Fufi was seriously wounded and is reportedly being treated at a hospital in Tirana.
More than 6,900 candidates from 66 political parties contested 140 parliamentary seats.

Edward Snowden appears to show up the U.S. again
The 30-year-old NSA leaker manages to make Washington seem stumped as he slips out of Hong Kong and lands in Russia, apparently planning to end up in Ecuador.
MOSCOW — The hunt for Edward Snowden stretched around the globe Sunday as the 30-year-old leaker of U.S. classified material flew out of Hong Kong under cover of darkness, dropped into the protective embrace of Russia and made plans to hopscotch through Cuba and Venezuela to eventual asylum in Ecuador.
His stealthy movements, aided by the anti-secrecy WikiLeaks organization and its high-powered lawyers, played out like an international game of Where's Waldo. 
The American citizen — a traitor to some and a folk hero to others — kept a step ahead of his government, which has charged him with violating the Espionage Act and revoked his U.S. passport in an effort to bring him to ground.
In his rush to elude arrest, the onetime low-level computer analyst appeared to be showing up the most powerful national security apparatus in the world, just as his campaign to expose vast U.S. surveillance programs had embarrassed the Obama administration by contradicting the president's pledge to run a government with an "unprecedented level of openness."
With the collusion of several governments, Snowden managed over the weekend to make Washington appear stumped in its attempts to extradite the former National Security Agency contract worker for leaking details of secret phone and Internet eavesdropping programs.
The drama afforded nations with histories of being thorns in the side of the U.S. a rare and low-cost opportunity to frustrate the administration.
Nevertheless, administration officials remained confident that, despite not succeeding in having Snowden detained in Hong Kong, they will eventually catch their man. 
"The belt will tighten. We will get him," said one Department of Justice official, speaking anonymously because of the delicate matter of handling both a criminal case and an awkward game of multinational diplomacy.
President Obama is not the only party to the drama caught in the contradictory politics of secrecy. 
Snowden has portrayed himself as a campaigner for openness and freedom of the press. 
However, Ecuador, his apparent haven in South America, has had a checkered history on that score. 
This month, the Ecuadorean Congress, at President Rafael Correa's insistence, passed a law that prohibits news organizations from publishing classified or confidential government documents or material from personal documents without their owner's permission.
Any hopes that Justice Department and national security officials might have had for gaining a helping hand from Moscow appeared frustrated Sunday by indications that Russia, like Hong Kong, did not appear to want to keep Snowden for long.
"Moscow sees his presence as a big unasked-for headache and pretends he is not here," said Andrei Kortunov, president of the New Eurasia Foundation, a Moscow think tank. 
"Moscow is being very cautious as on the one hand it doesn't want to further damage their relations with the United States and on the other, it doesn't want to appear [to be] bowing to Americans."
U.S. prosecutors charged Snowden on a criminal complaint filed under seal June 14, accusing him of unauthorized communication of national defense information and providing U.S. classified intelligence to an unauthorized person, both Espionage Act violations, as well as theft of government property. 
He faces 30 years in prison, and potentially much more if federal prosecutors follow through with a grand jury indictment in the next 60 days, which they plan to do.
"The chase is on," said Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.), who agreed that time was of the essence, especially since Snowden has suggested that he is on the brink of revealing more classified secrets.
"I wanna get him caught and brought back for trial," the chairwoman of the Senate Intelligence Committee said on CBS' 
"Face the Nation." 
"And I think we need to know exactly what he has. He could have a lot, lot more. It may really put people in jeopardy."
Washington was trying to anticipate Snowden's moves and halt his dash toward a safe harbor.
"Persons wanted on felony charges, such as Mr. Snowden, should not be allowed to proceed in any further international travel, other than is necessary to return him to the United States," said Jen Psaki, spokeswoman at the State Department.
The Justice Department's spokeswoman, Nanda Chitre, said, "We will pursue relevant law enforcement cooperation with other countries where Mr. Snowden may be attempting to travel."
The prosecution of Snowden became public Friday evening when the Justice Department unsealed the week-old criminal complaint. 
It was at that moment, said one Justice Department official, that discussions between the United States and Hong Kong went flat: The spying charges "raised political concerns and put a new dimension on things," he said.
Snowden, the official said, was never "detained" in Hong Kong or held "under any kind of police protection" while he was residing at an undisclosed safe house. 
Crucially for the U.S., there was a delay in getting Hong Kong to respond to the criminal warrant and arranging an extradition hearing.
Top officials in Hong Kong also needed to brief the Chinese government in Beijing about detaining Snowden for extradition to the United States.
"There was a lot of red tape, but we thought it would get done," the official said.
Jeffrey Bader, a senior White House advisor on China during Obama's first term, surmised that Hong Kong would have had latitude to decide what to do with Snowden without Beijing's interference. 
Either way, he said, Hong Kong was "probably happy to get this off their plate."
The U.S. had expected Hong Kong to follow through on Washington's request to deliver Snowden over for prosecution, according to another Justice Department official. 
On Wednesday, Atty. Gen. Eric H. Holder Jr. telephoned his counterpart in Hong Kong, Secretary for Justice Rimsky Yuen, "stressing the importance of the matter and urging Hong Kong to honor our request for Snowden's arrest," the official said.
Also working their channels were U.S. State Department and consulate officials in the Chinese territory, as well as FBI agents talking to their colleagues there.
But when the criminal complaint was made public, Hong Kong asked for more information about the charges and for "evidence" against Snowden. 
The official said the U.S. "was in the process of responding … when we learned that Hong Kong authorities had allowed the fugitive to leave." 
The final response of the city's administration to the U.S. was that it "found our request insufficient," he said.
Officials in the Chinese territory said Sunday that without "sufficient information to process the request for provisional warrant of arrest, there is no legal basis to restrict Mr. Snowden from leaving Hong Kong."
Snowden landed Sunday afternoon at Sheremetyevo airport in Moscow. 
He was taken by car under some sort of Russian protection to what the U.S. official said was a "comfort zone" in the airport transit area.
A Russian Foreign Ministry official, also speaking on condition of anonymity, said Snowden indicated he had planned to leave Monday for Caracas, Venezuela, via Havana. 
But then the Ecuadorean ambassador to Russia, apparently at Snowden's request, arrived at the airport. 
With the ambassador's car idling out front, the two men launched into private discussions.
Snowden then said he would seek political asylum in Ecuador, the Russian Foreign Ministry official said, and booked a seat on a 6 a.m. Aeroflot flight to Havana, with plans to push on to Caracas and then to Quito.
Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Ricardo Patino said simply in a brief Twitter message: "The government of Ecuador has received an asylum request from Edward Snowden."
Snowden may have chosen Ecuador because WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange has been claiming asylum in the Ecuadorean Embassy in London for a year. 
Assange is trying to avoid facing criminal charges of sexual assault in Sweden, which he says are politically motivated, and possible criminal prosecution in the U.S. for publishing classified material allegedly leaked by Army Pfc. Bradley Manning, who is being court-martialed this summer at Ft. Meade, Md.
Now WikiLeaks has come to the aid of Snowden. 
"He is bound for the Republic of Ecuador via a safe route for the purposes of asylum, and is being escorted by diplomats and legal advisors from WikiLeaks," the organization said in a statement.
WikiLeaks quoted a prominent former Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzon, who is now the organization's legal director and Assange's attorney, as saying: "What is being done to Mr. Snowden and to Mr. Julian Assange — for making or facilitating disclosures in the public interest — is an assault against the people."

Kerry warns of Snowden consequences for Russia and China
US Secretary of State John Kerry has said it would be "disappointing" if Russia and China had helped US fugitive Edward Snowden evade US attempts to extradite him from Hong Kong.
Speaking during a visit to India, Mr Kerry said there would inevitably be "consequences" to such a move.
Mr Snowden flew out of Hong Kong to Moscow on Sunday.
He was expected to have flown on to Cuba, but Ecuador's foreign minister has since implied he remains in Russia.
Mr Snowden is wanted by the US for revealing to the media details of a secret government surveillance programme, which he obtained while working as an IT contractor for the National Security Agency (NSA).
'At risk of persecution'
Ecuador's foreign minister Ricardo Patino said Ecuador had maintained "respectful and diplomatic contacts" with the Russian government.
He said Moscow could "make the decision it feels is most convenient in accordance with its laws and politics and in accordance with the international laws and norms that could be applied to this case".
However, when asked whether he knew of Mr Snowden's current location he declined to answer.
Mr Patino confirmed that Ecuador was processing an asylum request from Mr Snowden, and read out the letter the fugitive had sent to President Rafael Correa in which he said he was "at risk of being persecuted by the US and its agents".
Defending the decision to consider Mr Snowden's request, Mr Patino said his country put human rights "above any other interest that may be discussed or any other pressure it may be subjected to" and that he would not face a fair trial at home.
He also said the US had been in contact, through its ambassador, with the government in Quito, but gave no further details.
"We will consider the position of the US government and we will take a decision in due course in line with the [Ecuadorean]constitution, the laws, international politics and sovereignty."
The US and Ecuador have a joint extradition treaty, but it is not applicable to "crimes or offences of a political character".
Meanwhile, Russia's Interfax state news agency quoted an informed source as saying Moscow was considering a US extradition request.
But the source said Mr Snowden had not crossed the Russian border so could not be detained.
'Effect and impact'
Mr Snowden, 30, has been charged with theft of government property, unauthorised communication of national defence information and wilful communication of classified communications intelligence.
He was in hiding in Hong Kong when the details first emerged, but the authorities there said he left voluntarily on Sunday, saying US extradition papers were incomplete so there was no legal reason to prevent his departure.
But Albert Ho, his lawyer in Hong Kong, told the BBC that a government official urged Mr Snowden to go over the weekend. 
Mr Ho said he believed the official was acting on the orders of the Beijing government.
Speaking in Delhi, during a visit to India, Mr Kerry told reporters it would "be obviously disappointing if he was wilfully allowed to board an airplane".
"As a result there would be without any question some effect and impact on the relationship and consequences."
The US has revoked his passport and wants Russia to hand him over before he leaves. 
Mr Snowden is believed to have spent the night in an airside hotel at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport.
Mr Kerry urged Moscow to "live by the standards of the law because that's in the interests of everybody".
"In the last two years we have transferred seven prisoners to Russia that they wanted so I think reciprocity and the enforcement of the law is pretty important," he said.
Reports had suggested Mr Snowden would fly to the Cuban capital, Havana, on Monday morning, before taking an onward to flight, possibly to Ecuador.

Lawrence police smear claims: Mark Ellison QC to lead review
Reports the police wanted to smear the family of murdered teenager Stephen Lawrence are to be examined by a senior barrister, the home secretary has said.
Mark Ellison QC is already looking into allegations of police corruption in the initial investigation of the murder.
Undercover officer Peter Francis says he was instructed in 1993 to find information that could discredit the family and anti-racism campaigners.
Scotland Yard has refused to confirm or deny the claims made in the Guardian.
Prime Minister David Cameron said he wants to "get the full truth out" about "horrific" allegations and has called for an immediate investigation.
Home Secretary Theresa May told MPs that the latest allegations will be looked into by Mr Ellison and also as part of Operation Herne, which is an investigation into undercover policing at the Metropolitan Police.
She said the Lawrence family "experienced an unspeakable tragedy".
She continued: "Their pain was compounded by the many years in which justice was not done and these allegations still coming 20 years after Stephen's murder only add to their suffering."
Any investigations should be "ruthless in purging" corruption and wrongdoing from police ranks, Ms May said.
Mr Ellison was the lead prosecutor in the trial of Gary Dobson and David Norris, who were convicted of Mr Lawrence's murder in January 2012.
Their convictions came 18 years after the black teenager was killed at a bus stop in Eltham, south-east London in an unprovoked attack by a gang of white youths.
'Tarring the campaign'
Mr Francis told the Guardian and Channel 4's Dispatches programme that after the killing he posed as an anti-racism campaigner in a hunt for "disinformation" to use against those criticising the police. 
He said the Metropolitan Police were concerned the reaction to the Lawrence murder might result in rioting similar to that following the beating of Rodney King in Los Angeles.
Working as part of the Met's now-disbanded Special Demonstration Squad, which specialised in gathering intelligence on political activists, he said he came under pressure to find "any intelligence that could have smeared the campaign" - including whether any of the family were political activists, involved in demonstrations or drug dealers.
Mr Francis, who used the name Peter Black while under cover, says the aim of his operation was to ensure that the public "did not have as much sympathy for the Stephen Lawrence campaign" and to persuade "the media to start maybe tarring the campaign".
Mr Lawrence's mother Doreen Lawrence said she was shocked and angry at the disclosure.
"Out of all the things I've found out over the years, this certainly has topped it," she said.
"It just makes me really, really angry that all of this has been going on and all the time trying to undermine us as a family."
While the Metropolitan Police would not confirm or deny the allegations, the man who was in charge of the Met between 1993 and 2000, former commissioner Lord Condon, told BBC News he had no knowledge of any campaign to smear the Lawrence family.
"I can say categorically that at no time during my time as commissioner did I authorise or condone or was aware of the sort of smear operation that's been described in the Guardian," he said.
"I don't know if it's true or not, but I can certainly say that from a senior level, as far as I'm concerned, there was no such operation."
'Getting to the truth'
An independent investigation into a number of allegations against former undercover police officers, codenamed Operation Herne is under way. 
In a statement the Met said: "At some point it will fall upon this generation of police leaders to account for the activities of our predecessors, but for the moment we must focus on getting to the truth."
London Mayor Boris Johnson, whose responsibilities include oversight of the Met, said he had already spoken to current Met commissioner Sir Bernard Hogan Howe about the claims and pledged to "leave absolutely no stone unturned".
Shadow home secretary Yvette Cooper said the investigation had to be both rapid and independent of the police.
And former Labour Home Secretary Jack Straw told the BBC he would be asking the Independent Police Complaints Commission to investigate the latest allegations.

An unlit Olympic torch will be sent into space ahead of the 2014 Winter Games in Sochi, Russia.
The Russian Federal Space Agency will take the torch to the International Space Station in early November as part of the four-month torch relay, which starts in October.
Once in space, two Russian cosmonauts will take the Olympic torch on a spacewalk.
Dmitry Chernyshenko, head of the Sochi organising committee, said; "The spacewalk by two Russian cosmonauts with the Sochi 2014 Olympic torch will be an historic moment."

Paris tries to befriend tourists ... by stereotyping them
(CNN) -- Type in "French are" into Google, and one of the top auto-complete items that pops down is "French are rude."
That exact phrase "French are rude" comes back with 93,000 Google results.
And France topped out a poll last year of rudest countries to travelers.
It's a common stereotype, but it could soon be inaccurate if a new 'charm-school' initiative pays off.
Tourists will no longer encounter surly waiters or boorish hotel staff, in Paris at least, if they apply the advice from a new tourist manual about befriending visitors, launched by the Paris tourist board and Paris Chamber of Commerce.
doyouspeaktouriste.fr offers tips on how to assist Brits -- they want personalized advice and like to breakfast between 7.30 a.m. and 8.30 a.m. -- and look after Chinese -- they appreciate original luxury shopping suggestions and require nothing more than a smile and a "ni hao" to consider you agreeably polite.
Other nationalized tips include:
Americans: Expect quick, personalized service; fluency in English
Germans: Enjoy cleanliness and a handshake
Belgians: Prefer budget hotels and Wi-Fi
Brazilians: Like physical contact and taxis
Spanish: Look for free things; eat dinner between 9 p.m. and 11 p.m.
French: Enjoy sampling international food; don't want to be considered a "tourist"
Italians: Eager to explore; welcome attention on their kids
Japanese: Often need to be reassured; never complain; bow frequently
Dutch: Look for free things; enjoy digital information
If it sounds like France is trying to overcome its own national stereotype by spreading others, that's only partly true.
"You don't welcome a Japanese tourist the same way as an Italian one. There are codes to take into account, so you have to adapt," Jean-Pierre Blat, general director of the Paris area tourist board, told The Telegraph.
France has had its share of bad publicity where tourism is concerned in recent months.
In April the Louvre Museum closed after a spate of thefts, and in May a man shot himself in front of horrified tourists in the Notre Dame Cathedral.
Officials are passing the new guide to taxi drivers, hotel and restaurant staff and others most frequently in contact with the city's 29 million visitors each year.
It's not a new idea.
China did something similar before the Beijing Olympics in 2008, informing citizens that spitting, cutting queues and clearing your throat loudly may not be as tolerable to tourists as they are to locals.
China has recently taken its politeness initiative outside its own borders too, launching campaigns to teach tourists how to behave while abroad.

Serena: I apologized to Maria over Rolling Stone article
(CNN) -- Serena Williams refused to get drawn into a pre-Wimbledon war of words with Maria Sharapova Sunday -- claiming she had apologized to her Russian rival for comments made about her personal life.
Sharapova used her press conference Saturday to lambast Williams over an article which appeared in Rolling Stone magazine.
It included a veiled reference to Sharapova's relationship with Bulgarian player Grigor Dimitrov and also contained a controversial passage about the rape of a 16-year-old girl by two high school American football players in Ohio.
"If she wants to talk about something personal, maybe she should talk about her relationship and her boyfriend that was married and is getting a divorce and has kids," Sharapova told reporters.
The 31-year-old American is romantically linked with her French coach Patrick Mouratoglou.
Sharapova also questioned the wisdom of the World No.1's comments on the rape, for which Williams was later forced to apologize, saying she found them "sad.".
But Williams, who opens her Wimbledon title defense against Luxembourg's Mandy Minella Tuesday, said she had reached out an olive branch to Sharapova at the WTA players' party in London last week.
"I feel like Maria, unfortunately, was inadvertently brought into a situation she should have never been brought into," Serena said.
"I personally talked to Maria at the player party. I said; 'Look, I want to personally apologize to you if you are offended by being brought into my situation. I want to take this moment to just pour myself, be open, say I'm very sorry for this whole situation'."
Despite a grilling from the media, Williams refused to get drawn into a row over Sharapova's stinging attack, while repeatedly apologizing for the Rolling Stone article.
"It definitely hasn't been easy. And I feel like I really wanted to say, I apologize for everything that was said in that article," she said.
She also conceded the controversy may be a distraction as she bids for a sixth Wimbledon title and 17th grand slam crown.
Her 16th came when she beat Sharapova for the 13th straight time in beating the defending champion at the French Open.

Snowden's departure from Hong Kong spares China a headache
Popular sentiment had been building against extraditing the former NSA contractor to the U.S. Beijing now avoids a protracted battle with Washington.
BEIJING — By allowing, or perhaps pushing, Edward Snowden to leave Hong Kong, Chinese officials managed to show they would not kowtow to U.S. demands while still bringing a hasty end to an incident that threatened to strain ties with Washington for months or even years.
Given the former National Security Agency contractor's allegation that U.S. surveillance and hacking activities had targeted facilities in mainland China and Hong Kong, popular and official opposition to extraditing Snowden to the U.S. had been building here for weeks.
China's move, analysts said, also reflected a calculus that whatever short-term anger Snowden's departure precipitated in Washington, it would be preferable to a protracted battle had he stayed in Hong Kong and fought extradition or applied for asylum.
Officially, authorities in Beijing were keeping an arm's-length distance from Sunday's developments in Hong Kong, a former British colony of 7 million that returned to Chinese rule in 1997 but retains a separate political and legal structure that guarantees greater civil liberties than on the mainland. 
Hong Kong has a treaty with the U.S. that allows for extraditions, although mainland officials are allowed to intervene in cases that they determine concern foreign policy or national defense.
"We have noted relevant reports but are not aware of the specifics," Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said in Beijing on Sunday. 
"We will continue to follow its development. Hong Kong is ruled by law.... The central government always respects [Hong Kong's] handling of affairs in accordance with law."
But Willy Lam, a political analyst at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, said it was "highly likely" that Beijing authorities had quietly instructed Hong Kong officials not to give up Snowden.
"The decision was basically made in Beijing not to send him to the U.S.," Lam said. 
"Hong Kong was seeking a politically expedient way out before the legal procedures started. What the Hong Kong government said is that they received Washington's request [to arrest Snowden] but were seeking more info. But they haven't gotten it. So the pretext was that they have no legal reason to detain him."
Simon N.M. Young, a law professor at the University of Hong Kong who has been closely monitoring Snowden's case, called Hong Kong's decision to allow the departure "a shocker."
"I thought he was going to stay and fight it out," Young said. 
"The U.S. government will be irate with their Hong Kong counterparts. They may even question whether the Hong Kong government was acting in good faith pursuant to their treaty obligations."
In Washington, White House and State Department officials declined to comment, a sign of the sensitivity of relations between the U.S. and China.
Jeffrey Bader, a senior White House advisor on China in President Obama's first term, speculated that there would not be a conflict between the U.S. and Beijing over the move, because China had limited its role by not offering asylum to Snowden and not seeking to debrief him on the NSA snooping.
Bader was skeptical that the decision to allow Snowden to leave was made in Beijing.
Hong Kong authorities "have been pretty firm about protecting the autonomy of their decision making," said Bader, who is now with the Brookings Institution. 
He speculated that Hong Kong probably decided to allow Snowden's departure because it wanted to avoid being caught in an extended legal battle.
They "were probably happy to get this off their plate," he said.
Cheng Li, another China scholar at Brookings, said that while things could change, for now, both sides would be relieved. 
He compared the case to that of a famous Chinese democracy activist who sought refuge in the U.S. Embassy in Beijing during the Tiananmen Square crackdown in 1989.
"Based on what we know, there won't be prolonged diplomatic tensions, like what happened with Fang Lizhi in 1989," Li said. 
"He was hiding in the U.S. Embassy in Beijing for a year, and that caused tremendous tensions."
Opposition to extraditing Snowden from Hong Kong had been mounting with each new revelation about NSA surveillance. 
A public opinion poll last weekend in Hong Kong found about half of respondents did not favor sending him back to the United States for prosecution.
Although officials in Beijing kept their comments on Snowden to a minimum, an editorial last week in the Global Times, a newspaper with close ties to the Communist Party, inveighed against extraditing him, saying, "It would be a face-losing outcome for both the Hong Kong government and the Chinese central government if Snowden is extradited back to the U.S. Unlike a common criminal, Snowden did not hurt anybody. His 'crime' is that he blew the whistle on the U.S. government's violation of civil rights."
And just hours before Snowden's departure from Hong Kong became public, the official New China News Agency published a commentary titled: "Washington owes world explanations over spying accusations."
"The United States, which has long been trying to play innocent as a victim of cyber attacks, has turned out to be the biggest villain in our age," the news agency said. Before it extradites Snowden, the commentary said, "Washington should come clean about its record."
In Hong Kong, support for Snowden hinged both on the territory's historical status as a refuge for dissidents — mostly from the mainland — as well as locals' outrage over Snowden's revelations that their supposed ally, the United States, had been targeting the city for extensive surveillance activities.
Law Yuk-kai, director of Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor, said Sunday that he was pleased the city government had "honored its obligation under our legal system to allow Mr. Snowden to leave."
"Hong Kong was probably not a very good place for him," Law added. 
"The legal procedures involved had certain uncertainties: First, the legal system is not totally in our hands; Beijing has a lot to say. Second, the procedure relates to a large number of big legal issues … extradition legislation, refugee laws and constitutional obligations to protect rights under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights."
Joseph Fewsmith, a professor of international relations and China expert at Boston University, cautioned that the Snowden case might not blow over as quickly as some expect.
"I'm afraid that the Snowden affair will have a significant effect on Sino-U.S. relations," he said. 
"We have just had a summit meeting intended to air issues and build trust; this affair is likely to destroy whatever trust was built up. People talk a lot about 'strategic mistrust' these days; I think it has just been increased."

Spain arrests eight suspects linked to al Qaeda
(CNN) -- Security forces arrested eight members of a group linked to al Qaeda on Friday in a Spanish enclave in North Africa, authorities said.
"We have broken up a network responsible for sending combatants to al Qaeda-linked terrorist groups operating in Syria," the Spanish Interior Ministry said in a statement.
The suspects were captured in Ceuta, a Spanish enclave that borders Morocco.
Authorities said the network was based in Ceuta and the nearby Moroccan city of Fnideq.
It recruited, trained and paid for terrorists to fight in other countries.

Lawmakers say tenuous ties shaken further as Snowden lands in Russia
Washington (CNN) -- The fragile U.S.-Russia relationship -- already frayed by disagreements over Syria, Iran and nuclear arms -- showed another sign of strain Sunday, as American lawmakers blasted the country's President Vladimir Putin for allowing NSA leaker Edward Snowden to land in Moscow while evading U.S. espionage charges.
Snowden, who has admitted leaking top-secret information about government surveillance programs, left Hong Kong on Sunday and later touched down in Moscow, according to Wikileaks, which helped him travel. 
While Russia is not believed to be his final destination -- Ecuador's prime minister said Snowden applied for asylum in his country -- lawmakers on Sunday were quick to fault Putin for harboring a man the U.S. government desperately wants back.
"Putin always seems almost eager to put a finger in the eye of the United States, whether it is Syria, Iran, and now, of course, with Snowden," Sen. Chuck Schumer said on CNN's State of the Union. 
"That's not how allies should treat one another, and I think it will have serious consequences for the United States-Russia relationship."
That relationship was already showing signs of strain at last week's Group of Eight conference in Northern Ireland, where global leaders pressured Putin on his country's support of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, which extends back to the Cold War and Assad's father. 
At a joint appearance that followed a bilateral meeting last week, Putin and President Barack Obama were tense and unsmiling and offered no indication their deep disagreements about the way forward in war-torn Syria were any closer to being resolved.
Later in the week, Obama publicly pressured Russia to join the United States in slashing its supply of nuclear weapons, saying both nations needed to "move beyond Cold War nuclear postures."
Obama delivered his remarks at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin, which for decades symbolized the East-West divide.
On Sunday, however, the divide between the United States and Russia persisted. 
Schumer, a New York Democrat, suggested on CNN that Putin personally approved Snowden's landing in Moscow on Sunday.
"Very few are the areas in which he does cooperate (with the U.S.) these days. I think this action, Putin allowing Snowden to land in Russia and then go somewhere else, is going to have serious consequences for the U.S.-Russian relationship," Schumer said.
His characterization of Russia's stance was echoed by Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham, an infrequent ally of Schumer's, who spoke on "Fox News Sunday."
"I hope we'll chase him to the ends of the earth, bring him to justice and let the Russians know there will be consequences if they harbor this guy," said Graham, who represents South Carolina.
"They want to be part of the world community, the (World Trade Organization). They want a good relationship with the United States. They should hold this felon and send him back home for justice," Graham said. 
Russia joined the World Trade Organization last August after nearly two decades of negotiations. 
Before being admitted, it was the largest economy not represented at the global trade body.
As lawmakers spoke Sunday, it remained unclear where Snowden's final destination would be, though he was not expected to remain in Russia. 
Snowden's U.S. passport has been revoked, according to a source familiar with the matter, setting up any travel out of Russia to become a major diplomatic flashpoint.
"Persons wanted on felony charges, such as Mr. Snowden, should not be allowed to proceed in any further international travel, other than is necessary to return him to the United States," State Department Spokeswoman Jen Psaki said in a statement.
Earlier in June, Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Russia would consider a request for political asylum from Snowden, but that such a request from the NSA leaker had not yet been made.
Peskov, in an indication of the Kremlin's stance, also wrote on Twitter, "The U.S. security services were breaking the laws of their country by tapping phone calls and conducting Internet surveillance."
"Snowden, same as Assange, is a human rights activist," he continued, referring to WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, currently holed up at the Ecuadorian Embassy in London, where he's been granted asylum.
Asked Sunday whether he believed Putin had advance knowledge of Snowden's travel plans, Rep. Mike Rogers, the Republican chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, said, "That wouldn't surprise me."
"Russia is a country that wants to get back on the world stage, and I don't think they really care if they do it in a way that's in the best interest of good citizenship around the world," Rogers said on NBC's "Meet the Press," citing Putin's stance on Syria and nuclear disarmament.
"I'm sure they would love to have a little coffee and a few conversations with Mr. Snowden," continued the Michigan Republican, referring to the Russians. 
"That's why this is so serious and why we need to be so aggressive in making sure that people understand the difference between somebody who betrays their country and gives secrets away that will protect American lives at the expense of whatever he hopes to gain in the company of the Russians."
Rogers' remarks underscored the debate between those who believe Snowden committed an act of treason and those who view him as a hero promoting greater government transparency. 
The debate has created unlikely alliances in Washington, where some Democrats find themselves on the same side as Republicans -- and opposite their base -- in calling for Snowden's arrest.
An empty debate? Why little will happen to change how we snoop
Rep. Nancy Pelosi, the House Democratic leader, was loudly booed and heckled at a conference of progressives Saturday when she asserted Snowden had broken the law. 
Earlier, she drew a distinction between lawmakers like herself, who oversee the nation's security, and privacy-minded citizens.
"I know that some of you attribute heroic status to that action," she said, referring to Snowden's leaks. 
"But, again, you don't have the responsibility for the security of the United States. Those of us who do have to strike a different balance."
"I don't think this man is a whistle-blower," another California Democrat, Sen. Dianne Feinstein, said on CBS' 
"Face the Nation." 
"Whatever his motives are, and I take him at face value, he could have stayed and faced the music. I don't think running is a noble thought."
That view was countered by Sen. Rand Paul, a libertarian-minded Kentucky Republican who has been one of the few U.S. lawmakers to praise Snowden. 
While he warned Snowden would be discredited if he "cozies up to the Russian government," Paul suggested the former CIA employee had lived up to his duty as a citizen by exposing what he felt were government misdeeds.
"I would say that Mr. Snowden hasn't lied to anyone. He did break his oath of office, but part of his oath of office is to the Constitution," Paul said on CNN, adding: "He was simply coming forward and telling the truth -- that your government was lying."

Unwitting Guinea Pigs: EU Seeks To Reduce Patient Protection in Medical Trials
Strict regulations currently protect patients from being unwittingly used to test medications. 
But the EU is proposing changes to its Clinical Trials Directive that would eliminate the need for informed consent -- and be a boon to the pharmaceutical industry and other researchers.
"Study participants sought! Do you suffer from irritable bowel syndrome?"
So read the kind of ads that pharmaceutical research institutes post on buses and trains to attract volunteers looking to earn a bit of cash by being a guinea pig for drug tests. 
Sometimes it's about high blood pressure, sometimes about eczema, and sometimes the thing being researched remains unspecified. 
The important thing is rounding up enough participants for a clinical study.
If the European Commission gets its way with amendments to its Clinical Trial Directive, though, the search for subjects in tests involving not entirely new active ingredients will soon become much easier. 
According to its proposed amendment, it will suffice for a patient to land in a hospital currently running a certain clinical study. 
Whether a cancer patient or accident victim, the person will automatically become part of the test -- unless he or she explicitly declines to do so. 
If patients aren't in a position to decline because they are unconscious, they would have to be carrying a patient decree specifying that they do not want to be included in the tests. 
Such a regulation would even violate the EU's Charter of Fundamental Rights, which stipulates that patients must give their informed consent to be included in a test. 
Indeed, it would jeopardize one's right to bodily self-determination.
Negotiators in Brussels are still wrestling over every word in the draft regulation. 
Among its main opponents are German politicians focused on health issues. 
"Waiving the express consent of patients overturns the good rules of clinical praxis," says Peter Liese, a member of the European Parliament representing Chancellor Angela Merkel's center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU).
In the coming weeks, physicians, politicians and industry representatives will meet to discuss the planned reform at a symposium in Berlin. 
They will address the issues of protecting human dignity and whether patients can unwittingly be put at the disposal of medical research.
The push for the regulation from Brussels has primarily economic motives. 
When presenting the plans last fall, then-European Commissioner for Health and Consumer Policy John Dalli said that there was an "urgent need to empower the pharmaceutical industry in Europe." 
He also noted that, between 2007 and 2005, the number of applications for clinical trials had dropped by 25 percent while test costs have continued to rise. 
Likewise, he added that many tests are now being conducted in newly industrializing countries -- which he saw as unacceptable for an already industrialized region like Europe.
Associations of medical specialists have also been criticizing the current situation in Europe. 
The German Society of Hematology and Oncology (DGHO), for example, claims that the situation has dramatically worsened in recent years "as a result of excessive bureaucracy." It also cites a recent survey of cancer researchers reportedly finding that a third of all trial-conducting institutions in Germany would like to cut back their study activities even further.
Many physicians back the reform in the belief that it will strengthen independent research by also making it easier to conduct non-commercial studies.
Sacrificing Rights for Expedience?
What is at issue now is whether the Commission can find the right way to, if possible, make desirable reductions in bureaucracy while safeguarding patients' inalienable rights. 
Seven hundred proposed amendments have already been submitted to the draft. 
Proposals from all 27 EU member states landed on the wish lists in the European Parliament, and lobbying groups have made their voices heard, as well.
The most controversial issue revolves around the roll of the ethics commissions. 
Under the current system, such bodies are responsible for approving a study before testing is allowed to begin on patients. 
But, under the amended version, ethics experts will examine such plans and only issue nonbinding opinions on them.
The current system is admittedly time-consuming and complicated. 
Under the federal structure of Germany, more than 50 ethics commissions have to authorize such studies regardless of the number of participating hospitals. 
Nevertheless, other researchers are voicing warnings about the plans from Brussels. 
Bernd Mühlbauer, a pharmacologist who sits on the board of the Drug Commission of the German Medical Association (DCGMA), says it is "completely incomprehensible" why the EU now wants to do away with all the important rules that the medical community worked out over the course of many years.
Mühlbauer believes that one could create exceptions to the rules for studies conducted by independent researchers. 
But, as it happens, even these kinds of research studies are frequently co-financed by pharmaceutical companies, for example, in an attempt to expand a drug's range of applications to include additional ailments.
Among the most far-reaching of the planned chances is that auditing authorities would only have 10 days to make a decision on whether to give a study the green light. 
If the experts miss this deadline, the application would be accepted by default. 
"That is completely unrealistic and gives rise to the question of whether the Commission and the Parliament are really taking seriously the reviewing of experiments on humans," says Otmar Kloiber, the general secretary of the World Medical Association. 
Allowing this to happen, he continues, virtually precludes the effective safeguarding of patients.

Planned reforms of Common Agricultural Policy under fire
Members of the European Commission are due to hold talks on Monday to reform the controversial Common Agricultural Policy (CAP).
The CAP began in 1962 as a way to increase food production. 
It costs around $75bn (£48.7bn) per year in subsidies to farmers, funded by taxpayers.
The Commission wants farmers to earn some of their subsidies, for example by protecting the environment, but farm ministers are fighting back.

Why are the French feeling so gloomy at the moment?
The BBC's World Affairs Editor John Simpson goes to Paris to find out what lies behind the opinion polls which show the French are particularly gloomy, compared with other Europeans.
While France is facing economic crisis and austerity like the rest of Europe, he speaks to various people including a sociologist who attributes the nation's problems to its schools system.
Meanwhile Nicholas Snowman, an Englishman who has lived in France for almost 40 years, says: "This country has to decide whether it is going to be the world's best-ever Club Med, with fantastic tourist attractions and culture, and will go bust, or whether it will change its entire way of running itself and survive. No wonder everyone is worried."

BlackBerry took a beating on Wall Street after posting an unexpected loss and declining to provide specific smartphone sales numbers, troublesome signs that the company's crucial turnaround isn't going as planned.
The Canadian device maker lost $84 million during its fiscal first quarter and lost 4 million subscribers. 
Analysts were also disappointed by the company's projections for another operating loss in the current quarter.
BlackBerry shares plummeted 28%, or $4.02, to $10.46.
Chief Executive Thorsten Heins cautioned analysts during an earnings call that "transition takes time."
"Today, if you look at BlackBerry, we are a leaner, more efficient company," Heins said. 
"We are confident in the ongoing success of our transformation in the coming years. 
We are doing the right thing."
It was a pivotal period for BlackBerry, the first full quarter since debuting the BlackBerry 10 operating system. 
But the numbers indicated that the former industry leader is still struggling to revamp its image and catch up to Apple Inc.'s iPhone and Android devices.
"I can't imagine anyone is happy with BlackBerry performance except maybe BlackBerry competitors," said Jeff Kagan, a technology industry analyst. 
"To tell you the truth, hopes are dimmed by this first-quarter performance."
For the three months that ended June 1, BlackBerry reported a loss of $84 million, or 16 cents a share, on revenue of $3.1 billion. 
Adjusted for one-time events, BlackBerry lost $67 million, or 13 cents.
Analysts had expected an adjusted profit of 8 cents a share on revenue of $3.37 billion, according to consensus estimates by Bloomberg.
During the same quarter last year, BlackBerry posted a loss of $518 million, or 99 cents a share, on revenue of $2.8 billion.
BlackBerry said it shipped 6.8 million smartphones during the quarter, which includes BlackBerry 10 devices and older models. 
That was down from 7.8 million in the year-earlier period.
About 40% of the smartphones it shipped were BlackBerry 10 devices, although the company didn't break out numbers by specific smartphone model. 
The company shipped just 100,000 PlayBook tablets during the quarter and said it would abandon plans to upgrade it to run on the BlackBerry 10 operating system.
"Our teams have spent a great deal of time and energy looking at solutions that could move the BlackBerry 10 experience to PlayBook," Heins said, "but unfortunately, I am not satisfied with the level of performance and user experience and I made the difficult decision to stop these efforts."
The tone and numbers in Friday's earnings report came in stark contrast to the promotional hype and glowing comments made by BlackBerry executives since the debut of BlackBerry 10 in January.
Once again, BlackBerry's global subscriber base decreased, now to 72 million. 
That crucial number has been on a downward spiral recently: Last quarter, the company said it had 76 million subscribers, down from 79 million in the previous quarter and 80 million in the three months before that.
The decline of 4 million subscribers during the quarter reflected decreases in North America, Latin America, Europe, the Middle East and Africa, BlackBerry Chief Financial Officer Brian Bidulka said in a call with analysts. 
The company saw increases in the Asia-Pacific market.
BlackBerry this month released its much-anticipated Q10 smartphone in the U.S. featuring its signature Qwerty physical keyboard. 
Amid rumors that the touch-screen-only Z10 was not selling well — BlackBerry hasn't provided hard sales numbers — the company desperately needs consumers to flock to the Q10.
Both phones are running BlackBerry 10, a completely revamped operating system that debuted early this year after months of delays. 
The new OS allows for separate work and personal profiles, eliminates the need for a home button and makes multitasking across apps simple.
Looking ahead, the company warned that it expected to see an operating loss for the current quarter. 
It also declined to provide projections for how many BlackBerry 10 or total devices it expected to sell in the current quarter.
"It's a very competitive, very volatile market. 
So many dynamics going on here," Heins said. 
"So it is really, really hard to predict, even with a three-month outlook, where we're going to be."

Hundreds of actors, musicians and filmmakers are making extra cash with their cars by working as drivers for Lyft, Uber and Sidecar.
By day, Jimmy Lucia is an actor.
By night, he roams the streets of Los Angeles as BatLyft.
Cruising in his blue 2013 Kia Rio hatchback, Batman-masked Lucia picks up strangers and takes them wherever they want to go.
On a Friday or Saturday night, Lucia will transport as many as 60 people.
But while Lucia's a nice guy, he doesn't give them a lift for free.
He is one of hundreds of actors, musicians and filmmakers who are making extra cash with their cars by hooking up as drivers with ride-sharing firm Lyft.
"Everybody has a survival job, and some people, like me, are lucky to have a 'thrival' job — I can thrive in this job while I pursue my dreams," Lucia said.
The ride-sharing service is only a year old but already has attracted thousands of customers a week who get around the city in rides by Lyft drivers — usually at a lower price than they would pay for a taxicab.
Lyft uses smartphone apps to connect ride-needy users with car-ready drivers.
Lyft and rivals Sidecar and Uber Technologies Inc., which operates the Uber and uberX services, are now in a handful of major cities.
The mini-economy they have created is disrupting the established business model of taxicab drivers, who want local officials to crack down on the burgeoning operations.
About 300 cabbies drove in circles around Los Angeles City Hall for about 15 minutes Tuesday morning honking in protest over what they called "high-tech bandit cabs."
Lyft, Sidecar and Uber ignored an order Monday from the city's Transportation Department to cease operating because they were violating city ordinances by not having permits or licenses.
The firms said they had agreements to operate from the California Public Utilities Commission.
William Rouse, general manager of L.A. Yellow Cab, said he's outraged about the new companies, especially when they advertise themselves as being 20% cheaper than regular cabs.
Rouse, who also is president of the Taxicab, Limousine & Paratransit Assn., said Lyft, Sidecar and Uber are able to offer lower fares than conventional taxis because they don't comply with the same regulations that his industry does and their drivers don't have taxicab licenses.
"We spend a lot of money to comply with regulation," he said.
"We jump through a lot of hoops.
So yes, if a company doesn't have to spend any money complying with regulation, then of course it gives them an unfair competitive advantage."
Rouse also complained about the lack of inspections and background checks performed by ride-sharing companies on their drivers and their drivers' cars.
And he questioned the adequacy of insurance.
"This is no safer than hitchhiking," Rouse said.
"People don't hitchhike anymore because hitchhiking is dangerous.
If you take one of these services, you're essentially doing the same thing as hitchhiking."
Lyft, Uber and Sidecar said they indeed comply with regulations, screen drivers through background checks and make sure that both their drivers and riders are safe.
Lyft, for instance, said it has $1-million liability insurance coverage for each incident; drivers also are required to have their own private auto insurance.
The services say they also pre-inspect the drivers' vehicles, which must be a 2000 model or newer for Lyft and Sidecar and a 2006 model or newer for Uber.
Lyft said it may begin to require regular vehicle inspections as the service moves forward, and Uber said it conducts more inspections if it receives feedback that an uberX driver's car may not be up to standards.
Lyft driver Lucia said he understood the concerns, but he said many riders are turning to Lyft and other services because they feel safer and more comfortable than they do taking other forms of transportation.
"The most common thing I get asked is if I can be personally requested," Lucia said.
"They don't feel like they're in some cab.
They feel like I'm their friend who's just continuing the party."
There isn't hard data yet on whether these services could become a permanent fixture or fade away, but they are establishing themselves as viable transportation options, said Lauren Setar, lead transportation analyst for research firm IBISWorld Inc.
Because users need smartphones to request a ride, she said, the services are particularly attractive to young and middle-aged users.
"It's not really using anything that they don't have," she said.
"It's using smartphone technology, so it's something that's pretty widely adopted."

The legal team behind Proposition 8, California’s gay marriage ban, on Saturday filed an emergency motion asking the U.S. Supreme Court to block a flurry of weddings that began weeks before many thought possible because of a surprising federal appeals court ruling.
Lawyers with the Arizona-based Alliance Defending Freedom claim in a petition that 9th Circuit Court of Appeals acted too early and and unfairly when it let same-sex marriage resume in California on Friday.
Alliance Defending Freedom Senior Counsel Austin Nimocks wrote that the Supreme Court's consideration of the case is not over because his clients still have 22 days to ask the justices to reconsider their decision, saying that Proposition 8's backers did not have legal authority to defend the ban.
The filing took place as hundreds of same-sex couples were lined up to get marriage licenses in San Francisco – where it was Gay Pride Weekend -- and other cities around the state.
“Today's petition asks the Supreme Court to find that the Ninth Circuit had no jurisdiction to order same-sex marriages on Friday since the case had not yet come back down from the nation's highest court,” the attorneys wrote in a statement.
“We see this as illegitimate and lawless,” John Eastman, chairman of the National Organization for Marriage, told NBC News.
“The 9th circuit had no jurisdiction to lift its stay.”
But  John Davidson, the legal director at Lambda Legal, which supports same-sex marriage, disagreed.
“I think the decisions of this week give us huge momentum,” Davidson told NBC News.
“I’m very excited by how this is going to help in the legal battles but as well help in public opinion.”
On Friday afternoon, the two couples who challenged Proposition 8 were married after the 9th U.S. Circuit Court dissolved its stay blocking same-sex marriage in the state.
Friday, State Attorney General Kamala Harris declared Sandra Stier, 50, and Kris Perry, 48, "spouse and spouse" shortly before 5 p.m. (8 p.m. ET) at San Francisco City Hall.
About 90 minutes later in Los Angeles, Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa married the other couple, Paul Katami and Jeff Zarrillo, on his last day in office.
The 9th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals lifted a stay two days after the Supreme Court declined to rule on Proposition 8, thereby upholding a lower court's decision overturning the ban.
The appeals court had blocked enforcement of that ruling pending the Supreme Court decision.
The Supreme Court also struck down the Defense of Marriage Act, a 1996 federal law that barred recognition of same-sex marriages.
Supreme Court rulings generally don't take effect for 25 days.
But Harris had called on the 9th Circuit to lift its stay as soon as possible Wednesday after Brown told the state's 58 counties to prepare for same-sex marriages.
Brown issued an order Friday afternoon making that official, declaring that "marriage licenses must be issued to same-sex couples immediately."

A U.S. citizen killed on Friday in Alexandria, Egypt, site of anti-government protests, was identified as Andrew Pochter, the U.S. Embassy in Cairo told NBC News on Saturday.
Kenyon College in Gambier, Ohio, said the 21-year-old student was from Chevy Chase, Md.
In a statement, the school said Pochter was an intern at AMIDEAST, a nonprofit group not affiliated with Kenyon that is engaged in international education, training and development.
"We are providing appropriate consular assistance from our Embassy in Cairo and our Bureau of Consular Affairs at the State Department," a State Department said.
Al Jazeera and Reuters, both quoting doctors and Egyptian security officials, and the Egyptian state news agency MENA reported Friday that Pochter died from a stab wound to the chest in Alexandria.
Gen. Amin Ezzeddin, a senior security official in Alexandria, told Reuters that the American was using a mobile phone camera near an office of President Mohammed Morsi's Muslim Brotherhood as it was being attacked by protesters.
He died at a military hospital, Ezzeddin said.
At least 80 other people have been wounded in the Alexandria protests, MENA reported.
The protests are part of the buildup to nationwide "June 30" demonstrations marking a year since Morsi's election.
Morsis opponents hope to force early presidential elections, citing a range of social and economic issues.
Morsi's supporters have promised that they will also take to the streets to defend the Muslim Brotherhood-backed government.
"There are no services.
We can't find diesel or gasoline," Mohamed Abdel Latif, an accountant, told Reuters.
"We elected Morsi, but this is enough."

A federal appeals court must first lift a hold on the original decision that struck down Proposition 8.
Backers of the gay marriage ban weigh further legal action.

SAN FRANCISCO — The U.S. Supreme Court's ruling on Proposition 8 will lead to same-sex weddings resuming in California in less than a month, officials said Wednesday, as disappointed backers of the marriage ban questioned whether to pursue a long-shot legal battle to limit the court's action.
"After years of struggle, the U.S. Supreme Court today has made same-sex marriage a reality in California," Gov. Jerry Brown said.
Before the weddings can take place, a federal appeals court must lift a hold on the original decision that struck down the voter-approved constitutional amendment.
A spokesman for the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals said it usually takes the court at least 25 days to act after a Supreme Court ruling.
Brown ordered his public health agency to advise the state's counties to "begin issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples in California as soon as the 9th Circuit confirms the stay is lifted."
Opponents of same-sex marriage have argued that Chief U.S. District Judge Vaughn Walker's 2010 decision overturning Proposition 8 applied only to the two same-sex couples who challenged the ballot measure.
But their enthusiasm for going to court to try to narrow the effect of the decision appeared to wane over the hours after the decision.
"This is far from over, I can tell you," Chapman University Law professor John Eastman, who supports the same-sex marriage ban, said Wednesday morning.
But by late afternoon, Andy Pugno, chief counsel for ProtectMarriage, the sponsors of Proposition 8, said further legal action was not a certainty.
"It is possible there could be further litigation, and it is possible that this is going to be the end of it," Pugno said.
With Brown and Atty. Gen. Kamala D. Harris pledging to block Proposition 8 across California, the momentum for gay marriage was likely to hinder any further challenges.
Even Eastman admitted "the politics" of the issue would make more litigation unpredictable.
California voters passed Proposition 8 in 2008, six months after the California Supreme Court ruled that gays had the right to wed.
The state high court later ruled the initiative was a valid state constitutional amendment but upheld the validity of an estimated 18,000 same-sex marriages that occurred before the election.
Lawyers then turned to the federal courts.
They said Wednesday that they were ready to fend off any attempt to limit the reach of the injunction against Proposition 8.
"We already have motions drafted," San Francisco City Atty. Dennis Herrera told a cheering crowd at City Hall on Wednesday.
"We're ready to go back to court.... We will not rest until we have marriage equality throughout this country."
The Supreme Court ruled that ProtectMarriage lacked legal authority or standing to appeal Walker's ruling blocking the ballot initiative.
The high court said the sponsors of Proposition 8 were not directly affected by Walker's ruling.
Only state officials had the right to appeal, and they refused.
That procedural decision wiped out the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals' 2-1 ruling against Proposition 8, leaving only Walker's decision in place and affecting only California.
That the now-retired trial judge would have the final word on Proposition 8 was not anticipated when the federal lawsuit challenging the marriage ban was filed in 2009.
The high-profile lawyers at the helm of the legal battle spoke of winning a broad pronouncement from the Supreme Court that would entitle gay couples to marry across the country.
The district court in San Francisco was merely the first stop.
Walker, a Republican appointee who happens to be gay, drew the case by random selection.
He noted at the time that his role was likely to be limited to fact finding, as the case was clearly bound to move upward.
Walker presided over a 12-day trial that examined whether homosexuality could be changed and whether same-sex marriage had any effect on opposite-sex couples.
Experts testified on the history of marriage and the kinds of discrimination that gay men and lesbians have faced.
ProtectMarriage called only two witnesses, explaining that its other experts feared being harassed and that in any case the decision of higher courts would prevail.
Given the lopsided nature of the testimony, the trial's outcome seemed assured long before Walker ruled.
ProtectMarriage later argued that Walker should have stepped aside because he was gay, but the 9th Circuit disagreed.
Walker did not publicly discuss being gay until after his ruling, though his sexual orientation was well known in the legal community and he did not try to hide it.
Walker, 69, said Wednesday that it had been a mistake for ProtectMarriage not to put on a case.
He said he believed that the evidence from the trial had "subliminally" affected the Supreme Court and that other constitutional cases could benefit from trials.
"It allowed the parties to put on the evidence, to make the arguments and to get a decision based not on what the judge thought or history or broad constitutional provisions, but on the basis of evidence put in the record by witnesses who got on the stand and testified," Walker said in an interview.
"I think that makes a difference."
UC Davis Law professor Vikram Amar said Walker's ruling technically applied only to Los Angeles and Alameda counties, where the same-sex challengers live, because the suit was not filed as a class action.
"But limiting it, even if it is the legally correct thing to do, is pretty unlikely at this point," Amar said.
Other scholars agreed.
University of Santa Clara Law professor Gerald Uelmen said the proponents of Proposition 8 "would be laughed out of state court" if they argued that the California Constitution prevented a statewide enforcement of Walker's order.
County clerks who preside over marriages said they were ready for same-sex weddings.
Marriage licenses already are gender-neutral, and clerks began receiving calls Wednesday from gay couples wanting to schedule appointments.
Harris called on the 9th Circuit on Wednesday to lift its hold on Walker's ruling immediately.
The attorney general said she believed that the appeals court had the authority to act quickly.